Check one, two. Check test one, two, three.
It's a great...
Do that here. We'll get... Oh, two-minute warning. Here we go.
And...
All right. Good morning, everybody. Two-minute warning.
Two-minute warning, so if you want to grab some snacks,
breakfast, coffee, tea, whatever floats your boat,
and grab a seat. We'll start
promptly at 9:00.
Promptly at 9:00. I'm looking at my
phone clock now.
Morning. Welcome everybody to the annual GASB
update. We're super excited that you're all here today.
We got a lot of great content, four hours of
CPE, food,
all sorts of stuff that I'm sure everyone's excited about.
Thanks for getting here early. I know 9:00 with
Southern California traffic is sometimes a challenge, but appreciate it.
Appreciate everyone showing up in person, and welcome to everybody on the live
stream as well. So before we get started, just a couple of
housekeeping items. First housekeeping item is the
agenda for the day. So we have four sessions.
We have two this morning,
and then we have a 10-minute break in between each of the sessions.
We have lunch, I believe it's at
11:30-ish. We'll go with that.
I don't have the agenda in front of me. I'm getting a thumbs up. Perfect.
And then we have raffles sprinkled in throughout the day.
We have a couple of pretty cool prizes that we're going to be giving out.
So when it's that time, I'll be going through the
audience here and making some random selections, because that's
what I do. I'm an auditor.
And one of you will pick who wins a prize.
So, the other housekeeping items just to be aware of, we
do have restrooms. They are out that way.
So you go out the doors in the back, hook a right, and then they're on the
left.
Wi-Fi password, if you're wanting to connect, is
GG2026. So
that's GG2026.
That's kind of it. So first up this morning we
have
Crystal Cabrera and Riley Greenly going to be
presenting on GASB Statement 103.
So this is the big statement taking effect.
Not going to steal their thunder, and we're pleased to welcome them up.
We just have-
Still going on.
Oh, I think there's the...
Yeah, there is.
That's right.
We're going to hope that doesn't happen.
Don't walk, okay.
All right.
You can.
You want me to drive it?
Yeah.
Okay.
First, I want to make sure that when Ryan makes his random selection as an auditor
for the raffle, it's actually a haphazard selection of those
audits.
All right.
So we are your lovely hosts for the kickoff for the
first
session today.
And if I can get this on.
We can start briefly by introducing ourselves.
I guess housekeeping-
He went through that
... Ryan went through it, and introductions.
So Crystal, you want to kick it off?
Sure. Hi. So I'm Crystal Cabrera. I'm one of the directors in
LSL's Government Consulting Department. A little bit about myself.
I came to LSL back in 2014 after graduating from Cal State
Fullerton. I got my undergrad and my master's there in
accounting.
Also met my husband, who's also an accountant.
We met in the accounting society, so it's as nerdy as it comes.
And then we have our two adorable kids, CeCe and Leo.
So CeCe's seven years old, and Leo is three.
And we love Legoland. So that's us with the Lego dino.
And then
soccer is in season right now for Easter, so that's where we were.
So, yeah. But I'm loving being in the consulting department here.
I started in the audit department many moons ago, and then in
2022, when LSL kicked off the government consulting department, I moved
over, and I'm loving it ever since.
So
next, onto Riley.
Good.
So
as many of you know me, but those of you who don't, senior manager in our
government assurance division. I've been with LSL about
10 years now.
Recognized with the ICPA for planning and conducting single audits.
I'm a volunteer GFOA special reviewer.
You might have seen me speaking at CSMFO chapter meetings, or I'm kind of a
regular on your webinar series as well.
I feel like most of you have probably heard me speak about pensions and OPEB
enough times that you probably don't ever want to hear me speak about it again.
I got my degree in Santa Barbara, in accounting and economics.
I live here in Southern California, born and raised, and
been married now for eight years, and no kids yet, but I do have one cat
that my wife likes to tell me is my son.
So,
most of the things I like to do for fun, I travel a lot.
I like to be outside. I'm a big sports guy.
You'll usually find me playing golf on the weekends or just sitting on the beach.
I like cooking, gardening, all that.
So I just threw a couple pictures on here.
See my wife and I, some of the travels we've done of recent, and of course, the big
picture of Scribbles, my cat. So.
So kind of our agenda for today
is we're going to cover the three numbered GASBs that we have coming
up. First is GASB 103. Crystal's going to kick us off on
financial reporting model changes.
And then we'll go into GASB 104, covering some of the changes with capital asset
presentation, and then a new category for capital assets
held for resale. We'll talk briefly about 105,
and then we'll move on to the current projects, things we see on the horizon for
you.
So we put together this nice chart here.
It also has for us all the kind of dates these become effective.
So the two GASBs you're probably going to be drawn to immediately is 103 and 104.
Most of you in this room, those are going to be effective this year.
103 is probably the one you're going to spend more time on.
104 has a couple quirks
that we will cover. 105, effective next year,
and yeah, should be a pretty simple one as well, though this one is early.
Very encouraged to early implement.
So I guess we kick off with our first polling question.
Which GASB are you most interested in?
I think I know the answer to this question, but
we got 103, 104, 105, so financial reporting,
capital assets, or subsequent events, or maybe you're an expert and you're here,
you're excited for future projects, or you're here for the CPE.
That's fair, too.
So we'll wait for those.
Poll in the room here. Who's A? Who's 103?
Okay. How about B, 104?
Yeah, we got a few of those. And C, who's really excited about subsequent events?
Nobody.
Nobody. All right. Who's an expert? Who's here for CPE?
Thank you, Ryan. Ryan's here for CPE. All right.
I expect most of you guys talk about 103. So we'll cover that in detail today.
That's the big one we're going to spend most of our time talking about.
But we'll wait for the online polls to come in, but we'll kick it off with
reporting model changes.
Most important one in the room. So 103, so as Riley mentioned, this
one's going to take effect this year for all our 630 year-ends.
That one came into effect for fiscal years beginning after June 15,
2025.
The main reason that GASB decided to implement this
one was in addition to obviously just liking to keep us on our
toes.
Also just wanting to improve on just how the statements
are providing information to the users, making sure that they
are able to be used to hold governments accountable, and also just
to improve on consistency among the different cities.
So, improving clarity in the footnotes, MD&A,
things like that. So we'll start
with
the different sections that this GASB hit on.
So they hit on the MD&A, which I'll be going through, and then
Riley'll go into changes to unusual and infrequent items,
followed by the changes to the proprietary information, and
then followed up by major component unit information and
budgetary comparison information.
So all the different areas, we're going to detail out what you're going to look for
for 103 to make sure you're in compliance for this
year.So this
year, one of the big ones that's going to take a little bit of time
on the governments is improving on your MD&A.
So what GASB really wanted to do was improve on how we're
presenting the information, making sure that it's more thorough, that it tells a
story,
rather than just saying, "Revenues increased 5%."
Okay. That was really helpful. So we want to make sure
that we're really expanding on that.
And the sections that it's requiring that it be limited to are the overview of
financial statements,
financial summary, detailed analysis, which is going to probably take you the most
amount of time,
and then any significant capital asset and long-term financing activity,
and then any currently known facts, decisions or conditions.
So these are the sections you're limited to.
You'll notice that there's no budgetary information in here anymore.
So that's going to be kicked over to the RSI now.
Okay. So starting off, this overview of the financial statements, this is pretty
similar to what most entities already have, where you're going through,
you're describing the different types of statements that are in there, how they all
correlate, so your governmental activities, business-type activities, how those
all relate in your financial statements.
And then you're also going to focus in on any differences in the
information provided in each type of asset.
So this year, within the new GASB, they really want us
to improve on charts and graphs and making it as pretty as
possible. This is an example of one of the illustrations
within the GASB. They basically have different footnotes,
and it's really nice to look through there if you want examples on what the
MD&A should look like.
So this is one figure that's in here, and it basically shows the breakdown
within the government-wide financial statements and how the governmental
funds all roll up into your governmental activities.
But this just shows you an idea of something you could include within that
MD&A.
This is another table that also comes from those illustrations.
So you're going to have any sort of...
It shows the different assets, liabilities, and how those are all presented
within the financial statements.
So it's nice to show,
like I said, a different chart or something instead of just having all the verbiage
because I know nobody really reads through that.
In addition to that, we're going to have a financial summary within your MD&A.
This is pretty similar to what you have already.
So you're going to have the different comparisons on the
governmental activities and business-type activities.
You're going to have the year-to-year comparison, where you're showing your total
assets, liabilities, deferred inflows and outflows, net position, and
then you're also going to have the income statement activity.
We don't have a chart for that one, but think your normal MD&A.
That's where you're going to start with.
The detailed analysis is where things are really going to want to be beefed up a
little bit.
So like I said, we really want to tell the story behind the numbers.
So within this, it wants to be fact-based,
and you're going to discuss any activities that have a significant positive or
negative impact on those balances compared to last year.
So really wanting to describe what happened, not
just
that it happened, but what the reasons behind that were.
And then any sort of market changes, if there's any sort of investment
issues that arose, really detailing out what happened.
And they also really stressed avoiding repetition.
So you don't want to basically detail the exact same thing in one section of
the detailed analysis and then continue that on if it's
capital asset related. There's a whole capital asset and long-term debt section
now. So we want to keep referencing to that section, but don't
actually just
completely repeat the information over and over again.
Okay. So within the detailed analysis, you're going to have to break out the
government-wide activity as well as your fund level activity.
So for the most part, your analysis will be somewhat similar.
You're not going to have to detail what the analysis in the
net position and whether that changed or not on the government-wide side is, but
you will need to do that on your fund level, and you'll have to present your fund
level based on each of your major funds.
So you're going to want to have that information.
A lot of times when I'm reading through an MD&A, what I'm seeing a lot of is, okay,
well, general fund, the revenues increased by this, the
expenditures increased by this. And then for your
gas tax fund, same exact thing. It's very consistent, but it doesn't
necessarily explain the reasoning behind that.
And so you're really going to want to work on that and making sure now, because I
know how it goes a lot of times, we're just waiting for the auditors to give us
that draft so we can just pop the numbers in and then we're done, right?
So we really want to work on looking it over now maybe and thinking,
okay, what are we seeing just looking at a draft-level
overview of what we've got on our numbers right now?
And what are we already seeing is causing those changes so that we can
get ahead of the curve?
We're also going to want to include, like I said, the reasons for the change, a
quantified magnitude of that change.
So if it's an amount of the change or a percentage, you'll still want to
include that, but also any facts, decisions, or
conditions
in addition to policy changes. So if you're seeing anything like sales taxes
increasing, property taxes changing, changes in business
building permits, things like that,
you're going to want to show all of that in your description
as well.
And like I mentioned, avoiding duplication.
So you're going to have this section now, which is going to have your significant
capital asset and long-term financing.
So if you have any changesBig purchases of assets,
sales of assets, things like that,
you're going to have a section detailing what changed within there.
That might also end up impacting back on the other detailed
analysis. So it may impact your government wide, it may impact your fund level
if you increased financing, for example.
You're going to basically just reference this section rather than saying,
"We had a purchase of $1 million for this one asset,
and that is what increased our expenses in our
general fund." Something like that, you're just going to reference, "We had some
major purchases," which are detailed out in this section.
Just to keep from, like I said, repetition.
You're going in the capital assets, like I said, it's additions and disposals of
capital assets, any changes to commitments.
If you happen to have anything where council determines they're going
to set up a commitment for capital assets going down the line,
things like that, you'll want to include that.
And then for the long-term financing, sometimes governments are really good about
including their debt, but they forget about changes with their leases, SPIDAs,
any P3s, things like that, so you'll want to make sure that we're including those
as well.
And then as well as any changes in your credit rating and any,
like I said, policy changes or anything reflective of that.
And then we're going to have also this currently known facts, decisions or
conditions. So within that, you're going to want
to basically provide information to the users,
assuming that they know nothing about your city, assuming that they're not from the
same geographic area. Anything that might help them to determine
things,
looking at your MD&A, that would be useful to them.
So anything with trends and relevant economic or
demographic data. So if there's anything where your staffing
is changing, if you have any hiring freezes, things like that, that might
change their impact of that MD&A, you're going to want to
include that, as well as any factors used to develop the subsequent
year's budget. So anything that might impact your appropriations,
anything that might impact the amount that you are currently-- The
factors that you're using to develop that budget, you're going to want to include
those as well. As well as...
Yes, and then the budgetary analysis also moving to the RSI section.
So we're not going to include that at the end anymore like we used to.
So we're going to want to improve on that as well, and we'll go over the
changes to the RSI
in a little bit.
But for now, we're going to move on to polling question number two.
So how is your city's MD&A being prepared currently?
Is the finance leadership preparing the MD&A each year?
Are just the seniors and the staff level completing the MD&A?
Like I said, kind of just grabbing the information off those drafts and then
popping it in there, or is it kind of a collaborative team effort,
or do you happen to use a consultant to prepare that?
Can we get a show of hands in the room?
So how many is the finance director the one who
prepares it? Okay, cool. And then any seniors
or staff level comparing? Okay. And then how many is
it kind of just a team effort?
Good. And then using a consultant to prepare?
Okay. Yeah, ideally, especially for this year when you're going to
be kicking this one off, I would think C would be really important just
because sometimes it is good to gather the information at first at the staff level,
but you're really going to want to use all of the department as a whole and
all of that knowledge to really beef up the MD&A, like I said.
All right.
Riley can kick it off with the unusual and infrequent items.
Just kind of echo too what Crystal said there.
I think a lot of people are looking at some of these templates
that have kind of rolled over the years.
And there's a lot of work that's going to be going into these MD&A,
telling that story and being detailed as to specific
incidents that happen. I think the spirit GASB's looking for is someone
can come in, doesn't know anything about your city, look at your financial
statements, and understand some of the big specific impacts that are happening.
So taking that extra time, know what's going on in your city, know what kind of
major projects you have or big changes around the budget that are happening.
So just put a notepad down, track what those are.
Put them aside when you meet with your consultant or you meet with your auditor.
Plan to bring those up and we can kind of determine how those get incorporated.
But sooner the better for sure for this one.
I think a lot of people are underestimating what effort it's going to take.
So I know that's a lot of information.
Main focus, yes, is changes with the MD&A, but there are a couple other things
situationally that do change with GASB 103.
The first being unusual and infrequent events.
So we think of the old items, extraordinary events or special
items. For the most part, just take your brain and
switch that from special item, extraordinary, to unusual and
infrequent.
They want these presented a little different.
They want another section added to the bottom.
In this example that GASB actually gives us, there was a
flood and it damaged some of the assets at the city.
And they want these items broken out and not shown net.
You can't just do a special item and show a net effect for the whole year like
maybe people have done in the past.
Now we need to show what are the inflows and the outflows.
So for their example, actually have a grant revenue that they received to repair
the damages, as well as the actual cleanup costs that are going
out
to fix everything up.
But
really the location right before we have change in net fund balance, there's not
much else to this part in 103.
So if you have any specific things that come up, just keep an idea of what
events are occurring and bring those up with your auditor or your
consultantSo moving on to something with a little
more change. If you have proprietary fund statements, there is a
little bit of an alter with the setup and how the
statement is going to look.
We're still separating operating revenues and expenses and
non-operating revenues and expenses.
And then we have this new kind of area they're calling subsidies.
And these are going to be a separate section reported just specifically for those
non-capital subsidies.
So the definitions that 103 gives us is operating
expenses and revenues.
I feel like this is going in and out.
Operating revenues and expenses are everything that's not
non-operating revenues and expenses.
So really not a lot of changes there, probably from what you're looking at for your
finances right now. Where we are going to see changes is in this non-operating
section where they break down subsidies received and provided.
We have any contributions to permanent and term endowments.
These revenue expenses relate to financing, so maybe you had debt items.
Those are still going to be in your non-operating resources from the disposal of
capital asset activity. So sold a vehicle and had a
gain related to that. And then finally, the investment income and
expenses, that's not moving anywhere.
That's still going to be shown in your non-operating section.
So the big question you probably all have for me is, what the heck are
subsidies? Thankfully, GASB has given us a definition for
now. The rumors that I'm hearing right now as well is that they're
working on
in the future, maybe giving some further guidance and further defining specific
situations. But for now, what we're looking at
is resources received from another part of your fund,
for which there isn't a provided good or service,
and that it's directly or indirectly relating to the lowering of
fees within that fund. So the example I think
is you've got money being sent over from your general fund,
and it's going to waste service fund to cover the cost to
keep fees low. We go back to our government accounting 101.
Our enterprise funds are supposed to be self-sustaining.
You're charging customers enough money to cover the cost to provide that service,
right? So anything above that, you're subsidizing that fund.
Same is true for the other way. So if you have a fund providing
funds to another fund,
that subsidy's going out.
So they're not receiving in return provided goods or services.
And it's recoverable maybe through that fund's current
charging. So the example I was thinking is you've got a water fund
and you've got some excess revenues sitting in your reserves, and you're kind of
popping them over to that waste services fund to keep rates low for that.
And they have this for all other transfers are going to be shown down there in your
subsidy section.
So here's kind of a look at what the order of everything is going to
be. So you still have your operating revenues at the top and your operating
expenditures. You're still going to have that operating income loss.
We're going to show
those non-capital subsidies
broken out with their own subtotal line,
then to your non-operating items, and finally, if they're
applicable, those unusual or infrequent events.
So when I look at this, one of the areas I see a little work
put in is going through your transfers that you have between funds,
determining which of those do qualify as subsidies,
and differentiating within that what's going to be considered a capital
item. Are you funding capital projects or is it a non-capital,
a true subsidy that needs to be broken out here?
And that's really it. So
for those of you in the room who have discretely presented component units,
you probably know who you are. I don't think there's going to be impact on a lot of
the people in this room for this.
But GASB is specifying how they want those reported in your statement of
activities and your statement of position now.
They want a separate column or a separate area that all
these major component units are presented.
So what does that mean? You're just going to add an extra column onto the end.
I have an example here.
Right at the end, we have component units.
Not going to look greatly different probably to how you summarize your component
units now.
The only limitation they give with the GASB is really
readability. So you can put a column for each one of them or you can
summarize them. But in the end, if
you do summarize them,
you have to have this separate discretely presented schedule here.
So here's the schedule of statement of activity where they had two
major component units, an energy authority and an airport, and then they had their
non-major kind of group there.
Similar to how we show combining statements for your non-major
funds. But the big difference here is non-major funds,
those aren't reported on. There's not a direct opinion on each of those funds.
So that gets put all the way in the back of your financial in the supplementary
section. GASB said you can't do that for this.
Needs to be part of the basic financial statements, so it needs to come generally
after the fund level statements before you even get into your notes.
But if that applies to
you, have a conversation now, start assessing what major component units you
have, start that conversation.
So moving to the other area, I think
second to the MD&A that's going to require a little bit of work
is the budgetary changes.
So overall, your budget schedules are not going to look
foreign to you. They're keeping the very same format
of the three columns. You have your adopted original budget.
You have your final budget that includes all of your amendments throughout
the year, and then those actual results.
The big change this year is showing the variance columns.
You're going to have twoSo in the past, it's just been that actual amount compared
to your final budget. Now they want a variance between your original
adopted budget and what your final budget was.
Essentially, you're showing them what your budget is.
And then, as Crystal mentioned before, we're moving all that information from the
MD&A for budgeting down into these new
notes for the RSI.
And they're saying that anything
that they call a significant variation,
and no, I do not have a more detailed
example or
thing from GASB on that, those need to be represented down
there. And as themed with this GASB, tell the story for
what changed.
So I have
examples to show you here. So here's an example that GASB gives
us for a new budget schedule.
You can see,
again, nothing is going to look very foreign to you.
We just have this new column for changes.
And immediately you're drawn to a couple of these that have larger changes, maybe
that $1.6 million that's around this general government.
Maybe that's something that we consider significant.
But you're going to have to start developing some kind of threshold
or rationale behind which one of these you're going to focus on.
And they actually give us an example too of what the notes look like for that.
This is just the format that they give you, but you can see how they're pulling out
for each of the variants, each of the funds presented,
what the change was related to, and their pretty
detailed explanations for them.
So I know it's kind of small, but at the top, they're talking
about how a new shopping center opened three months
earlier.
Some of these other ones talk about a new police station, and they specifically
give the number of the police station.
So none of the old things increase because they
did, or we lost money because we expected more.
You need to be specific with your explanation in
why we're seeing these variances.
So what were the amendments for to increase your final budget?
Or why did we have much lower revenues or expenses related
to what we budgeted for in the actual?
I think similar to the MD&A, this is that information gathering
phase. Start it now and start developing these narratives.
You probably don't need final numbers from your auditor to know that,
I guess in this example, a big shopping center closed and you guys have seen a
reduction in taxes or something.
The last area
on here at the end, not super impactful to
everyone, but worth noting is the statistical section
change. So if you're following along in the physical, I just went back two
slides.
Really, this is focused for proprietary governments or if you've got proprietary
and fiduciary only. It's just updating the new
format to reflect that format we covered earlier
in 103
where you're distinguishing operating non-capital subsidies,
not operating in revenues and expenses.
Nothing real groundbreaking there.
Really the focus is going to be getting your data ready for
this MD&A and telling that story.
And then maybe some of you will be this budgetary information.
It's just changing your mindset on how you look at those variants and
preparing ahead of time for them.
So what are we going to do to start early?
Like I said, start
building that information, start understanding what's going to be
disclosed. Unusual and frequent items probably
not going to impact most people in this room, but track your events like
you normally would for special items and extraordinary items in the past.
Start those conversations. Proprietary funds, if you do prepare your own
financials, you can go ahead and already start structuring that.
Look at your groupings.
Look at your transfer accounts. I'm willing to bet a lot
of you have transfer accounts that mix capital and
non-capital. I would suggest maybe looking at setting up
new accounts for those so that those can be differentiated, especially if you have,
say, an auditor who prepares your financials.
You're going to need to tell them, "Hey, this account goes here, and this one's
non-capital subsidy. This one's just a transfer."
Major component unit,
you know who you are. If this affects you, start looking at your component units,
see what needs to be updated for your model.
And then the budgetary comparison, again, just re-echoing it because I think
it's important, develop that story.
For most of these, if you have LSL who prepares your ACFR for you,
we've already built a lot of this into our model,
and we can certainly set up a lot of this budgetary comparison information.
The proprietary funds you won't have to worry about.
We'll have in our model for the unusual and frequent items, so this can be easily
added and grouped. Unfortunately, we can't write your MD&A for
you as the auditors, but there are tons of services now out there
to help you set that one up in accordance with 103.
This page is just for your reference. So we have a nice link and a QR.
A lot of these examples that GASB gives us.
Quite a few of them are in the slides that we went through, but there are some
more. They really did a good job of giving some solid examples for us to
follow off.
All right. So deep breath in, deep breath out.
We got through the big GASB.
Polling question number three, though, is how are we feeling about
it?
So do we feel prepared after this? Do we feel like
substantial impact is not really expected, we're feeling pretty confident?
Can we get a show of hands in the room?
All right. We got one of those.
Hesitant about the impact? Are we worried this could be a little bit of work?
Got a few.
How about a large impact? Are we very concerned, and we need to devote
some resources right now?
A lot of you haven't voted.
I didn't think I was going to have to bring Dee up.
Are there any SOSs in this room?
Okay.
A lot of you just too cool for school to vote. Okay.
We'll make note. Mark down who didn't vote for CPE.
We'll take them off the list.
They'll be left out of the haphazard selection.
Yes. Apple, thank you.
All right. Well, that really concludes what we're going to cover for 103.
There are a couple other GASBs, not as big.
Crystal's going to take over right now and take us through GASB 104.
Thanks. Okay, GASB 104.
So, as we mentioned, this is the other book GASB that's going to take effect for
this year.
Not as much change, hopefully, as the MD&A and
our
budgetary schedules, but definitely something to be aware of for this
year.
Really trying to make sure that all of the cities are
providing the same type of schedule for the capital
assets roll forward, and making sure everybody's consistent, and there's an
apples to apples across different governments and cities.
As well as changes this year to the assets held for
sale. So we'll go into all of
that. So as I mentioned, really wanting
to think of your footnote for your capital assets and your roll forward,
breaking out how the presentation is
presented for the lease assets as well as your intangibles
and your subscription assets.
Right now, I know it's kind of inconsistent.
If you look at a capital asset roll forward, normally there's just leases
and SPIDAs, but there's not necessarily any differentiation
between the different asset classes.
So now going forward, you'll be required to break that down.
So you'll have lease assets for buildings or lease assets
for equipment, and it'll all be listed in that roll forward, which I'll
show you an example of in a moment.
As well as any sort of intangibles, if you happen to have any
P3 arrangements, things like that, also breaking that down by the type of asset
class. Subscriptions are typically just the subscriptions, but making sure that
those are also listed within that same roll forward schedule.
And any intangible assets that you might have, breaking down, if
there are differences, what those specifically relate to.
And so this is typically what you will see on a capital asset roll forward.
Like I said, it's really just breaking it down so that you have
the differentiation between the different types of lease assets.
This is pretty consistent with what we'll see if LSL happens to prepare your
financials. For the most part, that should already be listed out.
But just making sure if you do provide your lease schedules
and things. I know Debtwk's really good about breaking it out and showing like,
"This is related to buildings. This is related to equipment," or whatever different
asset type. But if you don't, if you maybe just are still rolling forward on an
Excel, kind of breaking it down so that they know exactly which type to classify
it on, on your footnotes.
Okay. And this is maybe going to be a bit
of the biggest issue with the assets held for sale.
And this is an area where typically I don't feel like most entities were
reviewing for
whether or not things were being actually actively held for
sale.
So with this, if you think of land held for resale, a lot of cities,
you'll have it on your general fund or if you have a housing fund.
You'll have assets held for sale, and it's kind of just been hanging
out there for a while, right? So sometimes it's been there for five years,
10 years, and nobody really knows when it's actually going to be sold.
So that's really what they're trying to look into is making sure that it's being
classified properly and that it's actively held for sale.
So within that, GASB basically classifies
equipment, buildings, land, all of that as held for
sale if you've actually decided to pursue the sale of the asset
and if it is probable that the sale will be finalized within one
year of the financial statement date.
So with that probability, more likely than not that you're
actually going to sell it within the next year.
Factors to consider that they've basically said these are what you're going to
use to determine whether or not it will be likely to be sold within the next
year is whether that asset is available for immediate sale in its
present condition. So if it needs a lot of work, you're not going to be able to
sell it as is right now, you probably won't be able to
sell it within the next year. So we're not going to classify that as held for sale.
Whether there's actually an active program to locate the buyer and whether that's
begun as of now.
If you're going to have to put it out for bid, things like that.
Whether there's actually market conditions for selling that type of asset.
Maybe it's something that's not necessarily super in demand and it
may kind of be on the market for a while, right?
We want to take into consideration all of these items, as well as
whether there's any regulatory approvals that will be needed to sell that asset.
So you'll have to make an assessment on these assets going forward.
You'll want to look at are we going to sell it? Are we not going to sell it?
And then we'll classify the changes from there.
And then you're going to be required to evaluate this annually.
So you'll want to look at all of these.
Maybe this year we think it is held for sale, and then next
year, while we're going through it, we're looking at it and we're like, "Actually,
we don't think we're going to sell it." We're going to have to change the
descriptions and how that's going to be
presented.Okay.
So for the actual reporting though, so if you happen to have anything that does
meet that criteria, you're going to continue to report it
in that same roll forward schedule we were looking at previously.
We're going to still report it within the major asset class.
The difference will be that there's going to be an additional disclosure, because
we all love extra footnotes, right?
So what that will include is you'll need to detail out the
historical cost, any accumulated depreciation by the
major class of asset, as well as if there's any carrying amount for the
debt for any assets held for sale for pledged as collateral.
So you'll need to have that information to include it within a footnote.
I'll provide that in the next slide.
An example that GASB gives us as an illustration, just
what you would basically detail out.
Something to be aware of though, like I mentioned, a lot of cities
have their land held for resale. That's kind of sitting right now in your
general fund or housing fund.
And it's typically been presented that way because it's more of an investment,
right? So it's kept within the fund level statements.
If we determine that that asset no longer is held for sale,
there may be a restatement required to move it out of your fund
level statements and then present it as land on your
government-wide statements.
So that's just something to be aware of.
If you do happen to have that, that's exactly where I would start looking at it and
determining whether or not it's going to have to be removed from held for
sale. And then
just to also be planting that seed with your council or
whoever, letting your auditors know in advance if you think that this
might take effect. And also it may impact your MD&A
that we were discussing.
If you happen to have a large decrease in your
major fund,
it may be related to this.
Okay, and then this is an example of that note disclosure that I detailed out.
Like you'll see, it has all of the three different criteria that
you need to include on the footnote.
So it has the total historical cost as well as the accumulated
depreciation and the amount pledged for collateral
for debt. And so this is example of exactly how you would put it.
You wouldn't break it out separately.
There's not really much of a change if it's already in your government-wide or your
proprietary statements. It's just making sure that we're
disclosing it in the footnotes.
All right, and 105 for subsequent events.
Yeah, I'll just say from
an audit perspective for 104, I think the GASB has made it
clear that there's a lot of these assets
sitting as investments, these land that have been carried for years.
We see it when we audit your books.
There's going to be probably a decent amount of those that are moving off your fund
levels.
If you do find ones though that you think still should
remain and are held for sale,
have those examples that Crystal covered.
As an auditor, we're going to be looking for specifically number two,
is there an active program to sell that property?
You can't just say, "Oh, well, we've
changed it to for sale on Zillow, so hopefully somebody buys it." And we've
seen it's been sitting on Zillow for 15 years.
Probably not probable that it's going to be finalized within one year of the
financial statements. So you can get ahead of some of the questions we have in
retaining that information.
And then with the restatement, most of that is coming out of
non-spendable, hopefully. Just that's how it's classified in your fund
balance. But you know your council better than we do.
They might see that decrease in fund balance and be a little alarmed.
So getting ahead, having those conversations early so they know this new
pronouncement's coming to place, that assets are still there.
This is just a movement on your statements.
All right. With that, we're kind of entering the home stretch, so I'll be
quick on GASB 105.
We have subsequent event changes.
So this one is effective fiscal years beginning after June 15th,
2026. So most of you sitting in this room, this is next
year. However,
early implementation very much so recommend, and
honestly, very low-hanging fruit.
If you
have LSL preparing your ACFR, many of you will
already see a subsequent event footnote in the back of your statements that
talks about we evaluated everything through these dates, and we didn't have any
items. Through our research, we found that that's probably going to be
consistent and in compliance with GASB 105, so there could be very little
lift for you with this one.
Really what GASB came out and said when they released this is they
found some high percentage number, I don't know off the top of my head,
people that were omitting items off of their financials as
subsequent. And they wanted to say, "Hey, look, we're going to give you
a more detailed explanation and definition of what should and
shouldn't be included."
So they're defining subsequent events,
surprise, surprise, anything after fiscal year-end date, but before the date
that the financial statements are available. So what does available mean?
Well, it means they're complete, they're in the form that they should be, they're
in compliance with GAAP,
and then they also
have obtained all approval necessary to post it.
So has your transmittal letter been created and dated?
Did your auditors issue your opinion letter? Is everything put together?
That watermark is off the draft, and it's now available to everyone.
You have to disclose, like I said now, the date at
which subsequent events were evaluated.
So there are some of you in this room that probably never had a footnote in the
back. There was no mention of subsequent events.
GASB says, "Okay, at the very least, we want you to say we looked at it up
to the date of our report."There's nothing for us to report here as a subsequent
event.
They're defining two different types of subsequent events.
We have recognized events. They're recognized, back to Accounting
101, something we're booking an entry for.
So the example that they give us is a water utility's
major customer files bankruptcy.
And so that customer had a significant amount of accounts receivable on
their books, and that's probably not very collectible anymore.
So you record that journal entry, reevaluate what your
uncollectible accounts are, and we need to incorporate that
within our notes and our disclosures and our financial statements.
Non-recognized events, so more the intangible stuff
that significantly affect your organization, but we don't need to book an entry
for. A lot of these principles are the same,
so anything significant that is favorable or unfavorable
and has a significant impact. So we're thinking debt-related
transactions. So you issued maybe new bonds after the fiscal year
end. Maybe you had a combination of government, or we disposed a
certain operation at the government, or some of your legally separate
entities were changed.
And they round this up by saying any transaction that would be
essential for a user's analysis. So we back all the way up,
GASB 103, they're carrying the same spirit when they're going through
these. Somebody comes in, wants to read your ACFR,
don't know anything about your city, your district, they should be able to
understand what are the significant events happening and what can I
determine that's going to happen in the near future.
So like I said, non-recognized, there's no entry, so it's just a
disclosure. We need to include a
description, what's the event, what effect
potentially is there, and if there's an estimated amount, we should disclose
that too, or at the very least explain what is the
reason we can't make an estimate for that.
So I think the most common one we'll see
is with debt, if anybody's issuing bonds.
Most of that's going to be estimatable.
You'll have an official statement probably by that time, or at least have done
enough work to know what some of those numbers are going to be.
But
not too crazy.
LSL's already updated all the templates, so if you didn't have that in the past,
you work with us. Not a lot here to do, just be aware
of these events and add them to that same notepad I mentioned
earlier to start conversations over the summer before the audit starts,
because you know what's on the pipeline.
You're planning well ahead for some of these events.
Some we can't control, and they're going to happen when they happen, but something
like debt, you know if you're already working with your legal
contacts on what that's going to be.
All right. So that's the new stuff. That's the new numbered GASBs.
We made it through them. We do have some implementation guides that have been
released, and we do have some GASBs coming up in the future and projects they're
working on. Main implementation guide out right now
just came out in June of '25, I believe,
covering these topics. So questions on cash flow
reporting, leases, some of the recent GASB statements
that have come out. Reading through it, a lot of these questions are
very entity specific.
It's not very long. It's like 15 pages, and most of it
is references to other things. So I would highly
encourage, read through it, see if any of those specific cases do apply
to you.
I think I wrote down a couple that really have an impact.
There's some stuff defining
component unit debt on here,
redefining some things around GASB 101 and how you're using future
rates and calculating out
compensated absences liability.
But for the most part, read it, reach out to your auditor, reach out to your
consultant, start having those discussions if you think one of those specific cases
apply to you.
Last polling question.
So we've learned about
the current GASBs and the implementation guide.
Are we feeling good?
We're feeling very good about this.
We think GASB's giving us a break this year.
No more SPIDAs and leases. Huh?
Yeah, best year yet.
We're thinking maybe a little more work.
Looking at that MD&A and maybe saying, "Oh, maybe that template's not going to roll
forward quite as well this year."
Are we a little worried? Do we need to put in a lot of extra work?
You guys have voted on every single one.
Or I'm unsure entirely. Maybe we need to start back and do this
presentation over.
One more time?
All right.
We'll close it out here with the current GASB projects that are coming up.
There are a few things that Crystal's going to cover that they're talking
about.
Is that for you?
Yeah. Wrapping it up. This is down the future.
It's not final yet, but just giving you guys a heads-up.
So there will be another implementation guide coming out, and the
comment period on that actually is over now.
So since we've updated the slides, that final is going to come out
Q3. So keep coming back and looking for an update on that.
We'll provide an update, probably via blog or a webinar in the
future. And then the next big one is going to be infrastructure
assets. So this is likely going to be GASB 106.
We'll go through a couple little changes with that as well.
And then there's going to be changes for going concern uncertainties
and revenue and expense recognition.
But those, we're just waiting on the exposure draft for those.
So
not too much knowledge on those yet.
Okay. So implementation guide number 2026-1.
So as I mentioned, that one, the comment period's over.
This one will come out soon. But it's focused only on GASB
103. So not too much of a change on that.
Like I said, keep looking through it if you have
any-... questions as you're going through implementing your
MD&A, your RSI schedules, all of that.
But we'll be providing an update on that shortly once it comes out.
And the next big one is this infrastructure asset.
So this exposure draft that came out,
some of the big changes are really just to make sure
that everything is consistent between different cities, that everything is
able to make decisions off of the information being provided,
and helping to assess the city's
economic condition.
And just to better provide capacity of those assets and
seeing how those assets are functioning and what
status they're in.
Okay. So this statement would refine the definition of infrastructure
assets,
and it would be defined as part of a network, stationary, or long-lived assets.
The government is going to be responsible for reassessing the
useful lives and the salvaged values of the infrastructure assets.
I know right now normally it's just we've got this range, and it's already been
here, and we're just going to keep it there the way it's been.
But going forward, we'll need to reassess that regularly just to make
sure that the useful lives are still relevant and they make
sense. And then we'll be depreciating
significant components with substantially different useful lives separately.
So if you happen to have part of an infrastructure asset that happens
to depreciate quicker, but it's always
remained within one larger asset that takes
a longer useful life, you'll want to be breaking those out going forward,
as well as disclosing assets by the different networks in the notes
and any infrastructure assets that have reached over
80% of their estimated useful life.
So if there's any assets that are on the books, large networks of assets that
happen to be 90% depreciated already, things like
that, the users of the financials need to know that so that they realize that,
hey, we're going to have some long-term impact.
Those assets are already at the end and maybe we're going to
have to reinvest funds down the line to
replace that, or fix it, or whatever it may be.
And then there's also changes to the modified approach if any of you happen to use
that.
So within there, the RSI supplementary information for that,
it used to be five years required, but now going forward it'll be 10.
And there's going to be any disclosures if you happen to have a
change in your condition level.
So if you happen to have a PCI level or anything like that, and we change it
from whatever rating it was, you'll have to disclose
that going forward. And then
we used to have to describe the modified approach
within the first note, so that summary of accounting principles.
Now that's not required to be presented there anymore.
And that will be in effect for fiscal year 2029 for most entities.
So we've got some time. And then, like I said, once that exposure draft is
all done, we'll keep you updated and let you know and come back
to the next GASB update because it'll be in there next year.
And prospective application, so we're not required to apply assets held prior
to this going into effect, so that's a good thing.
All right. And like I mentioned, there's also just this revenue and
expense recognition. There's not too much information out on that.
But basically, it's just going to establish how we're going to categorize and
recognize revenues and expenses going forward.
So hopefully not too much of a change, but we're not 100% sure
just yet.
All right. And with that, just some good resources.
I don't know how many of you are aware of it, but the GARS website on here,
super helpful if you're ever looking anything up.
So we have the link onto that, as well as just how
to access the GASBs on the website for those of you who
might not know, but
a lot of good information on there.
And with that, we'll leave it open for
questions. What? Oh,
we're open.
Thanks. Front right here.
So this is going to be specific to our
entity, but within our electric fund, when we set it up, the general
fund subsidized it in a way that we gave them a
pool of money to start the whole thing up.
Every year we do what's known as the pilot program transfer, where we move money
from the enterprise fund to the general fund to cover, as like an
ROI in a sense. Would that be considered a subsidy in this case, under
103, or is that handled differently because it's an ROI
versus
changing the rates? It doesn't affect the rates at all.
So we can talk about that. The pilot program is actually
specifically called out as one of the questions in that implementation guide.
So they do detail. I can't remember off the top of my head what their determination
was, but I know that was addressed.
Just a follow-up question to that as well.
If
we have it within our enterprise fund,
a contribution towards a project, a capital project, so it may not necessarily
be a typical subsidy where the enterprise fund needs
it, it's
an additional funding source that comes from a
non-enterprise fund. Was there any clarification or
specificity if that would be considered a subsidy?
So they
distinguish between subsidies, between capital and
non-capital. And so, also actually there's a question that
talks about the application for what would be called a capital subsidy,
and it's specifically funding capital projects like that.
So that would be included in the other non-operating section.
That other breakout is really for your non-capital items, like what's truly just
kind ofSubsidizing, not raising rates in general
for a fund.
Amy, you got anything on that one or...? Yeah.
That's good.
One online?
Just one question from our online viewers.
From your earlier section, are grants considered subsidies?
I didn't hear, what did you say?
I didn't hear it. Are grants considered subsidies?
Would think no.
Would imagine not, because it's being funded by an outside
source outside of the initial funds. Yeah.
There's more language to come out.
They have acknowledged that's something that they need to further define for
subsidies, and
there are some specific questions in that implementation
guide that cover specific cases, what qualifies and what
doesn't. But it seems like the definition that they're
reaching for is to
really
offset increasing fees and rates within your
entity or from another reporting entity for those funds.
So if the grant was for specifically that, I could see a case being
made, but it sounds like a specific conversation that needs to be had.
For the most part, I think what they're trying to do is basically show when
one fund is subsidizing another, rather than an outside source such as a
grant, or is a different agency altogether.
Mike, is it me? Is it you?
For the infrastructure assets for disclosing ones,
so are we talking every stretch of road and every
stretch of sidewalk that's considered 80% depreciated
or useful life's taken up that they're going to want us to disclose, or is this
more broad?
I would imagine you could probably do a blanket statement.
They haven't really given too much information on that just yet.
But I think going forward, you'll have to
probably disclose overall that the roads are at this
percentage or whatever it may be. I don't think that you're going to have to break
out specifically by stretch
if that's the case, because that's just going to be an overwhelming amount of
information.
Okay. No?
All right.
Cool.
That's it. Thanks, you guys.
Thanks. Great audience. Thank you.
Thank you.
All right. Thank you, Crystal. Thank you, Riley.
That was a great presentation. I'm feeling
much more educated about GASB 103 and 104.
So I know it says we have a 10-minute break, but we are a little bit ahead of
schedule due to an introductory snafu on my part.
Apparently, there were some slides that I was supposed to go over at the start to
go over some housekeeping. So we're going to go ahead and extend the break a little
bit, give you five extra minutes. So we'll start at
10:15.
And then the other items just to go over that I was supposed to go
over earlier, if you are participating online, please answer
the polling questions to get CPE credit.
For those of you in
person with us today, as long as you've signed in up at the front, you will get CPE
credit.
Also, if you have questions, which most of us got through that
process pretty painlessly the first time, but if there are questions, please wait
for the mic so that way our participants online can hear those
questions as well. Okay. We'll resume in
15 minutes.
live
recording.
Of improvement.
Now, here's the hard part. We're already in budget season, right?
And we're coming out of audit season, so we never have time to actually prepare
for good changes. So if we take an approach where we're
really looking at small things we can do
to improve our teamwork within our organization,
to have a better budget decision-making framework, and
improve transparency. There's a lot of really good small things we can
do that have a really big impact, not only on budget
engagement within our departments, but also budget
engagement within our community.
So with that, let's kick off the first polling question.
Does your organization have a defined budget calendar and
educational meetings within the organization, whether it's with the departments
at the beginning of the budget season?
A, we fly by the seat of our pants.
B, we have a high-level budget calendar.
C, we have a detailed budget calendar,
and D, we have a detailed budget calendar and a budget kickoff. So let's do hands.
A,
fly by the seat of our pants. Riley's flying by the seat of his pants.
I am so glad that none of your hands are raised.
We have a high-level budget calendar.
All right. I'm going to challenge you to make it a little bit more detailed, and it
actually makes a big improvement if we do that.
What about a detailed budget calendar?
We got a couple of T-Rexes going. A couple are eh.
Probably eight of you. And then D, detailed budget calendar.
Come on, wave it proud.
How many of you don't work in budget at all?
Good amount of you.
So those of you who don't work in budget, here's the thing, you
work with budget. A lot of the things we're going to talk about
today are not specific about how to produce a budget.
It's how can we work with our departments and our community and our council
members better. All right. So
first, how do we plan ahead for a team approach? Janet?
Thanks for having me here.
This is a good mix in the audience because
we're going to talk about teamwork,
and I would say that budget is not a team sport.
On one side, you have the administration and your budget team, maybe
your finance department is part of that team, and your
focus is on preserving resources to fight another day.
On the other side, and again, we had a good mix of the hands here,
you're a budget participant. You're looking to acquire
resources, and so there's natural conflict from that.
Well, a couple of years ago, GFOA started a project called
Rethinking the Budget. They've been rethinking everything, just like GASB.
I think they're following in the same footsteps, so you guys can have constant
change being thrown at you.
They started this Rethinking the Budget, and they've come up with some new
principles. So we kind of sprinkled those in with these slides.
And again, like Kelly was saying,
we're not asking you to go back and redesign your whole budget.
We're asking you to consider maybe doing something different, and this teamwork
approach is one of them.
I wasn't given the power to advance the slides.
No.
All right. So the first thing we're going to talk about is budget goals.
How many out there
your jurisdiction has a strategic planning process that you
go through every year?
Few of you.
My experience with strategic planning is that
your council or your board of supervisors
governance comes up with strategic priorities, and
they're more added on top of what you're already doing.
Anybody experience that?
Few of us. I always struggled with that,
because how do you make it so that everybody feels like
they're part of the team with regard to the goals that have been adopted with
your budget? Invariably, your public safety groups or
community development, homelessness is a big issue right now.
Those end up being the strategies that are put forward for what we're trying to
achieve with our budget, and it has a tendency to
omit some people, some departments, some participants to the
back.
GFOA's taken a different approach.
Let's
develop broad goals and identity for the
organization and get everybody on board
towards that identity of the organization so
that
the organization comes first and the department comes second.
In budgeting, we often have a lot of conflict because--
My conflict was always with the elected sheriff. A lot of you guys are cities.
You have a police chief. I don't know if they have the same kind of
power struggle that you have with an elected sheriff.
But invariably, the sheriff comes in, and even though we say, "Do status quo
budget, no extra new programs, no extra new
spending." And what do I have sprinkled on every single line item?
New spending, new projects, stuff that we said don't do,
and the sheriff is always willing to break the rules.
Well, what we want to do is let's turn the tables on that, and let's make it
so that everybody commits more to what the organization is doing as
opposed to their individual departments.
And that doesn't mean that your individual departments don't matter anymore.
It means that we just commit to, say that one of our
goals, and I always believe this, one of our goals in the budget process should be
to find more efficiencies and effectiveness in how we're allocating
our money. Now-Don't you think that every
department in your jurisdiction can get on board with that?
You can find little things within your budget and everything that you
do to find a better way to do it. As opposed
to say that
it's public safety and you have a gang problem, and so you're putting together a
gang task, and it's going to be cross-departmental.
That's a little bit harder to get everybody on board.
So you want to cultivate an organization or an environment
that treats the organization, has an identity for the organization, and
all of your participants,
mostly your internal participants, your department heads, your fiscal folks that
are in the department, know that they belong to the team.
You want to have a
we versus the I. You want more of the we as part of your
budget process instead of individual I's.
The reason why is invariably budget is-- There's a
technical side of budgeting, and all of us in our room,
we probably are experts at knowing how to project sales tax or
property tax or whatever your revenue streams are,
but there's also a psychological side to budgeting.
And that psychological side,
and because we have scarce resources, generates this
zero-sum competition that happens, where if a
decision is made to give money to one department, another department
loses, right? And when we can
create an environment in which all of us are working towards
the same set of goals, then we can minimize that
zero-sum
competition that happens in the background and this negative behavior
where departments are trying to play games in order to be able to
get more resources into their own budget.
GFOA has a document out there, and one of the things that they say on this
topic is to get everybody in the room and talk
about what the goals are. It doesn't mean that you're now
making decisions by a group.
Somebody once told me that if you put a group of people in charge of
feeding the horse, the horse will starve,
right? So group decision-making is very dysfunctional,
but when you give people the ability, as a
group, to have a seat at the table in the room to contribute
their ideas, to hear what others have to say, whatever that
decision that is made, the research and the science proves
that people will commit to it, even if it wasn't their idea,
and even if they opposed it. And it's as
simple as getting everybody in the room on a
regular basis to talk about these things.
How many people know what a collective action program is?
I guess, fair warning, I have a doctorate in public administration,
so I'm kind of like an educational geek when it comes to
principles and research.
But a collective action problem is where individual
actions, individual incentives,
objectives, the
backdoor agenda that they have is
detrimental to the group, right? And so these principles that
GFOA has put together are meant
to diffuse that self-interest and
focus more on the purpose, on the public
side of the organization and why it exists in order
to diffuse those power struggles.
And
besides getting everybody into the room, the other thing that
they recommend is to create
an inventory of your services and your programs.
And this doesn't mean that it necessarily has to be
all-encompassing, very comprehensive, because when
you try to do something like that, it's like it never gets finished.
Focus on the biggest things that your organization does, how it
affects the community, and then what it costs to do each of
those programs. And when you use this to focus on
the allocation in your budget, you take the I
out of it, and you diffuse all this budget game-playing conflict that happens on
the back.
All right. Hopefully I- You're good. Okay.
Trying to make sure I don't talk forever and then leave Kelly with five minutes
to wrap it up.
Can't see that far.
All right. The next strategy here is to build
a budget plan. Now, these aren't your budget instructions.
A budget plan is just the big rocks, the big
dates. How many have due dates on their budget?
I've kind of become-- A lot of us, right?
And those due dates, do they stress you out?
They stress me out, and I'm retired.
Due dates have a tendency to
create this feeling that
you're part of the army, and you have to follow the rules, right?
Well, they have to follow the rules, and they have to meet the deadlines.
But if we use language more like milestones instead
of deadlines,
that helps soften the authoritarian
impression that our budget has on our environment.
Like I mentioned previously, get everybody in the room.
Make them part of it. When I was finance director in Mona County,
we would set the dates for the budget.
So you would start on when do you want to adopt it, back that
up, when do you want to have a budget hearing, back that up 14 days or
16 days, I don't-- See, I lose information the longer I'm
retired. And you start filling in all of the major steps that you have to do,
and then it ends up that, hey, you guys start your budget in December or
January in order to have it adopted by June 30th. All right?
So-When you tell people that this is a date that you got
to submit your budget, or this is a date that we want you
in the boardroom or the council chambers in
order to discuss your budget. Invariably, I always had a
director that said, "Oh, I have a doctor's appointment that day."
Really? We set this up six months ago and you have a doctor's appointment,
and you can't change it in order to be there?
I think that
if you get everybody in the room, even though you and your team
internally have already mapped out these are the dates we want, before
you tell anybody that you've decided on the dates, get everybody in the room and
have them tell you what the dates are, and then direct them in the
direction that you want. Doing so will
get people to commit to the plan
as something important to their daily jobs.
I'm a grandmother now, which I never thought I would be.
I have two grandkids. One is almost four.
The last time I saw him, he was three, my grandson, Connor.
And then I have
a granddaughter. She's two, and she's like Shirley Temple, and
we're convinced that we need to make her a movie star so the rest of us can get
rich.
Anyways, I took them to a build a budget, see
build a budget, Build-A-Bear workshop. Right?
It rolls off the tongue. Build a bear, build a budget. Right?
You can use building a bear as the metaphor for your budget
plan. Right? So what kind of animal do you want it to
be?
It's Build-A-Bear, of course, it's a bear.
I
went to the Orange County outlets, and they have a Build-A-Bear.
You can have a pig, a rabbit, a giraffe.
I think I saw a horse, a donkey. You don't have to have
a bear. So we went through this discussion with my grandkids, pick a bear,
right?
And then we had to pick a color and a size.
So these are metaphors for getting common objectives,
focus on
the whole of your budget as opposed to the individual parts. Right?
Then you got to stuff it. They have this little machine that stuffs it, right?
And think of the stuffing as an analogy for the
distribution of resources that you have. Right?
What happens if you put too much stuffing in one arm and not enough in the
other, like, it's kind of limp over here, and it's got this arm that sticks out
like that. So you want to make sure your resources are being
allocated in a way that fits for the whole of the group.
And then this took the longest, picking out the
outfit. This is like your programs, right?
These are the things that you do. What are you going to decide you're going to do?
What do you want to be when you grow up?
And of course, my son picked a baseball,
a guy, bear. And I'm pretty sure that my son has something
to do with that because he's an avid baseball fan.
And these are the policy choices, and our budget is our most
important policy tool.
The last thing that you need to think about in your budget, and I think a lot of us
don't really think about this until maybe at the end when it actually is
facing us
front in the face, and that's the trade-offs.
Budgets always involve trade-offs, hence the conflict that we always have,
right? So think about the trade-offs and
don't be afraid to discuss what those trade-offs are.
I always had people wanting to do
internal stakeholders in my budget wanting to accomplish everything in the
next 12 months, so they had to get it in the budget.
And what we would talk about is that I think that's a really great idea.
We don't have the resources today.
It looks like you're not ready to go on this.
Okay, let's talk about this next year.
Let's put this on a parking list for next year, and let's make sure
this is something that we talk about.
That's an example of a trade-off in which you can focus on the
priorities and be able to take those things that you're not
going to do this year and carry them over to future years.
I thought it was really interesting adding heart.
I didn't even know that stuffed bears had a heart.
But they had my grandkids take the heart, and they kissed it,
and then they put it inside of the bear, so the bear now was alive and had
heart. And so at the end of the day,
budgets need to not be conflict. They need to be a family,
something that has heart. Because the
budget is not just a set of numbers and
columns on a page and dollars that we add
up and then find out we can't afford them.
Budgets are what we do for the community, and this is the direction that
GFOA is going and getting us more to think about
what does our budget do for our community that
provides them with value? And I think that's the hardest thing to understand.
It's been asked since the 1920s, 1930s, since we had an income
tax code, what value do we bring to our community as
part of the taxes that they pay to us?
All right.
Define the rules.
How many of you guys have budget instructions that you send out?
If you're a department that receives it or versus the
department that actually writes it.
I had those, and I would send them out every year.
And invariably, somebody asked me, "Well, how do I do that?" Well, if you look on
page 125 at the bottom, there it is. Right?
And it was a lot of words on the page, and
I got the sense that nobody read it.
Maybe if I was thinking positively, they read it, but they don't
understand it, or they didn't retain it because they're not readers, this, that.
So I've become a big proponent that our budget instructions need to almost get rid
of the words and use pictures and graphs and charts to tell
them what they need. And separate the user manual from the
instructions, right? The instructions should guide your budget
participants through the process, whereas your instructions is push
this button in the software, Control R, and it prints or something
like that.What are you going to do about new
positions? So these are the things you need to think about ahead of time
because you don't want to be thinking.
I don't know if there were any hands that were raised.
I know we just fly by the seat of our pants.
But you want to think about these things ahead of time.
What are you going to do about one-time requests?
I don't know about you guys, but the sheriff and the DA would come in
every time and say, "We have a one-time request.
We want to add a position."
What?
That's not a one-time request. So make sure you explain in terms that
your participants can understand what you mean by one-time requests,
and how they should present it to you.
Who will decide on competing priorities?
You want to decide these ahead of time.
How will it be determined? And
GFOA has a best practice to establish a ranking
system, although they don't have a document out there.
I'm currently working on presenting at CSMFO next
year. I don't know if it'll be accepted.
But to put together an objective ranking
framework where you assign
weights to individual characteristics of a proposal
in order to be able to rank it.
We had our chair one year come in, and we
had 25 different things we could have done as one time.
And he asked his colleagues on the board
to rank them. And you know what they did?
One ranked 24 as high priority and the
other as lesser priority.
Another one ranked them all as high priority. Right?
And when you have everything ranked as high priority, nothing is a priority.
Right? And when you say yes to everything we're going to do, everything ends
up being diluted and maybe jack of all trades, master of
none. You don't really do the quality work that we could
do if we're more discerning on how we prioritize our
project. And just to give you a teaser on what this
is.
Does your proposal align with our strategies? What's the impact?
What's the potential benefit? So you now are starting to get
the sense that we need to become a little bit more educated on
performance reporting and performance measurement. What does it cost?
Is it affordable? Can we sustain it? What's the need?
Is it important? Is it urgent? And then I think the most
important one here is it implementation ready?
How many times have we put stuff in our budget, the departments then
insisted that was absolutely necessary.
They did a write-up that made you believe that it was really a high priority,
and you get to June of the next year, and it still hasn't been spent.
And what do they do? They try to reprogram that amount that you gave them as
a one-time and move it into something else, right?
So make sure that the proposals that you're looking at and
that you're ranking, that they're
implementation ready, they're shovel ready.
I think the CDBG grant has that within theirs.
All right.
Define the process.
Your process should be designed in
order to vet out what the trade-offs are and how resources will be
used. And it should build and
maintain the legitimacy of your organization as a
government that serves the community. Right?
So you want to lay out what the process is and what the rules are going to
be. And
in these new principles that GFOA has, again,
I feel like a broken record here, but I can't overemphasize
it. Get everybody in the room before you make
decisions on what the final process is going to be.
Even if you've already got an idea or decided internally with your
team what that's going to be, don't tell them what it is.
Get them in the room and ask for their input, and
acknowledge that you've listened to what they have to say and then make a
decision. We're going to talk about decision-making in just a minute.
I think it's important to present a pre-education
workshop. I'll tell you that my biggest shock, I was
an external auditor auditing counties, transportation
agencies, cities,
specialized in transportation agencies for 25 years.
And
didn't really delve into budget a whole lot, certainly not the process other
than documenting this is your process and deciding whether we have risk with regard
to issuing our opinion on a financial statements.
But I came in to do the audit or to work
for a county, and I
ended up doing the budget, and I was so surprised that
I said, "Well, what's your fund balance?" "We don't know what that is."
And you learn that I had to use different terminology.
It's carryover balance.
And one, "Oh, that's our cash balance."
So train people on what the language is, what the
definitions are, and what the principles and
characteristics of budgeting that are important to them in a way that they can
understand. And I'm a firm believer that you have a curriculum,
that you make it fun, that you use visuals
more than written materials. And you find,
it's kind of hard in our profession to find ways to
reward those that participate and excel. Right?
Whether that's a certificate or
a special lunch that they get. And again,
I have to have a disclaimer here that I'm not an attorney. I don't practice law.
We have to make sure that whatever we do is legal.
GFOA recommendations within your process is to
have a high-quality revenue forecast.
When I first got to Mono County, they had a number that they were
forecasting for sales tax. I said, "Well, how did you get that?" She said, "Well,
that's what we always budget for that."It had no relevance to
the actual revenues that have been collected, say, for the last 10
years. So make sure that you're using some
kind of technique,
whether it's statistical regression analysis or just trend
analysis to project your revenues, and they're not
based on emotional gut feeling or based
on low-balling it so we always have extra money.
Because invariably when you get in front of the board or your
council or your commission,
when faced with not having enough money for all of the spending that
they want to do, what's the first place that they will turn? Revenues.
And they'll say, well,
I was very conservative on transient occupancy tax, TOT,
Mona County, high tourist
jurisdiction. And so I would always budget a bit on the
low side in case because if there's a fire, they close the highway.
One year, they closed the highway for a month to put
in tunnels underneath the road for animals, and
they did it right during the season everybody comes to go fishing
and camping. Just killed our TOT. So I was always very
conservative about that. But then I would have a board member, "Well, we think
you can budget $100,000 more there." And
unfortunately, the politics wouldn't let me say, "Well, that's because you got a
$100,000 request for appropriation that you want to approve."
So make sure you have a good, solid basis for your revenue
projections because you may be called on to be able to
substantiate those in the face of gimmicks that
council members or elected officials may try to do in order
to fund any kind of requests that are on their agenda.
Have a good service level baseline.
We have lots of instructions out there where we say, hey,
budget status quo.
And then you get your budget, and you start looking at the line item.
You want to know why did consulting go up 25%?
Oh, we're trying out a new program here.
That's not status quo budgeting.
That is something else. And make sure that you explain and
define what you mean by that. And then
differentiate between discretionary and
non-discretionary. And
discretionary means we got to do it, doesn't mean we have to do it the way we're
doing it, doesn't mean we have to do it at the level that we're doing it, but it
does mean that we have a mandate to do it.
Versus discretionary, which may stray
completely away from what the mandate is for your
jurisdiction.
Did you okay on time?
All right, take it away.
Actually going to go back for just a second.
We've been called a lot over the last
two budget cycles to help out with organizations
who are either super short-staffed, super behind in the accounting,
or we've even been called to a couple where their finance departments have been
completely decimated.
It seems like these are a lot of big ideas.
Big things to put into our budget process.
But the biggest thing that Janet's brought up so far is
one meeting.
Now, there's some planning on the front end of that.
Have your good revenue estimates before you even have that one meeting.
Determine what your goals are going to be before you even have that one meeting.
We go back even here, what are the rules?
How many FTEs do we think we can reasonably afford based on those revenue
projections?
These are all things that our department can be doing in the
pre-planning phase in December if you're a June 30 year-end.
And really get in front of the conversation before
everyone even starts thinking about what they're going to pull into
budget. And that's really where this engagement with the department starts,
because you already know where we're starting.
You already know what we can afford.
You already have a good plan in place, and you're being transparent in your
communication from the very beginning.
But the commitment is planning for that one
meeting.
Now, one of the things that is really important in defining the process,
the one thing that we keep getting called in with questions on,
is what softwares are organizations using to develop their
budgets? How many of you in here are using a software
to do it?
Raise it high. Raise it proud.
Maybe seven. How many of you are still, and don't be every
organization-- Actually, that's not true. LA County, I was in a software.
Costa Mesa and Seal Beach, we were still in Excel.
How many of you are still in Excel and Word?
Raise them high.
Probably just a little bit more. It's probably a 60/40 split would be my guess.
That-
How many feel their Excel
workbooks are career longevity
retention strategy?
That's a good one.
She's asking how many of you,
for those of you who couldn't hear online, the Excel
workbooks tend to be what buries the departments
when somebody leaves because nobody knows how to use it.
I will tell you, the most recent organization that I was brought into, a little
Shady McGrady happening, the former finance director took that all with them.
So they have zero to start their budget with.
I was not happy. Immediately told the city manager to call the city attorney, and
let's have a conversation.
But that software is terrifying. I will tell you, we were terrified of
it. Louis did an implementation with me on ERP
right before we left Seal Beach, and that was one of the things we were really
committed to automating because we put so many
resources into taking all of these budget
requests that are outside of the system and getting them into
this budget model so that we can produce a
document.The software is not
just a document producer, if you pick the right software.
A lot of software on the market, all they do is produce the document.
But if you build your process into your
software, and we're actually in the middle of building one.
We
implement Workiva for financial reporting for a lot of clients, and we do it for
budget and ACFR. But one of the things that we have been discussing over the last
year is this missing process.
The reason these softwares are so powerful is because you
can have, at a moment's notice, your over/under.
You can have the department submit another budget request.
Transparently, they can see it. They can see if the city manager made a decision
that something was going to be denied. It's right there. It's transparent.
It's available all the time. And at a moment's notice, the city manager
can send me a text, "I need to know my over/under.
I'm briefing the mayor in 30 minutes."
You can log in on your phone, you can log in on your computer, and you can look at
that dashboard and give that over/under just like that.
The software is one of your keys to transparency,
and it's the most critical part of your process,
because it allows you to put in that initial budget request.
It allows us to say, "All right. We've got
a budget deficit of $3.2 million.
We're not presenting a budget deficit, so here's the marching orders from the city
manager." And now you can go in and you can make your revisions.
And all of it's there. How many times do we end up going back and saying, "What do
we do? What did we take out? What items were taken out?"
The budgeting softwares today are meant to give you that
history, but to give you that transparency, and I think we
miss that when we look to a software as a solution, because we're so focused
on what we as finance folks do,
and not how it can benefit our departments.
So I wanted to go back to that, because I do think
getting out of Excel and the Word documents is
important. It leads to errors.
Louis will remember. Louis is sitting in the back, by the way, right in front of
me.
But I remember the day of my daughter's
adoption, our preliminary budget was due for the agenda
report,
and we were not finished.
We probably worked until 6:00 in the morning.
It was ridiculous. And it was our five-year forecast that was
the issue because,
boy, was I going to get my head ripped off for this five-year forecast.
And we worked all the way until the wee hours because we were trying to trace
numbers through this budget model and through the Word documents and through the
narratives and connecting with the council priorities and the
department's goals and making sure everything was ticking in time,
because that's how we were in Costa Mesa.
And we worked all night. I drove home at 6:00 a.m.,
showered, went straight to the courthouse for her hearing.
But we got it done. But it just about killed us.
With the software, we wouldn't have had to have worried about
90% of the hours that we spent working late. We would've just pushed a button.
We would've said it was done.
We wouldn't have had to have traced everything through the document.
So consider that your saving grace for finance,
even though it really benefits the departments, too.
So let's talk about the decisioning rules.
One of the things that we sometimes forget about
is council's priorities or city manager's
priorities.
They're not always the most important priorities.
Defining what those decisioning rules are early on in that
one meeting
and communicating, "Hey, first and foremost, we have got to
take care of all of the legal and mandate state
services."
Some folks who haven't worked in full-service cities don't know about minimum
staffing.
Some of the
staffing levels and operating costs are non-discretionary for police and fire
department. Lifeguard if you're on the beach.
We've got to prioritize those, and we have to prioritize
that service. What are we going to do? Default on our bonds?
Then you go into, okay, structural balance rule.
Do we have ongoing
costs funded? I can't read that sideways, that's why I have this here.
And of course, I didn't bring my glasses, so I'm going to do a little bit of the
old lady magic here.
Okay, so we want to present a structurally balanced
budget. Right?
We've got to make sure that all of our ongoing costs are funded.
To Janet's example, a new position
is going to cause ongoing costs. And if we're going to approve it,
we better make sure we can pay for that, not just this year, but into the future.
So when we're trying to make decisions, we need to make sure we consider
that.
Best practice, I think everyone in this room would agree, and I'm sure all of us
know this, best practice in the industry is one-time costs are only paid for with
one-time revenues.
Now, one-time revenues can come from a couple of different places. Right?
They can come from
an actual one-time grant, or maybe you get an allocation from the
state. They can also come from a one-time
revenue overage from the prior year.
So in Janet's example of her TOT being under,
if we had a positive net income in the prior year because
TOT came in 100,000 over budget last year
and we actually didn't spend it,
then that beginning fund balance has an extra $100,000 sitting in it that's up for
grabs. Now, we don't want to present this to the council.
We don't want to present this to the departments like, "Here's what's up for the
taking." But as finance directors, we can be
creative when we know they're high priority items.
We can get creative in how we fund them and say, "Hey, we did have this
one-time revenue.
As long as it's a one-time project, a one-time item, I think we can
fund it this way."I already
mentioned the personnel costs.
Core services.
The last organization I was at, Seal Beach,
was when COVID hit,
and one of the biggest challenges I think that we all faced
was expecting a crazy downturn
that was going to be sustained, and we were going to have to cut city
services.
Gave us a really good opportunity to go through the exercise of
what core services truly are
necessary for our community and which ones can
we defer.
Right?
Down Main Street, we had the sidewalks and streets power washed once
a week.
Easy, once a month.
That's an easy one to reduce the service level without a gigantic impact to
the community. So being able to determine what are those core services that
you really
can't reduce without a secondary impact versus which ones can you
alter.
And then your strategic alignment.
All of the things that we approve in our budget
should have a purpose. It shouldn't be a pet project for a
council member. I know that's hard.
I know it's hard for your city manager, for your mayor,
to not want to put these pet projects in that
have a lot of glitz and glam type of
benefits.
But if we can focus on that strategic plan
and have those strategic plan goals aligned
with each of our department goals. We used to do this in Costa Mesa.
If you all ever want to look it up, go look at, it was at least, what, 2019
probably, Costa Mesa budget.
You can see the strategic goals of the city council, and every department
had to develop their own department goals that aligned with that
strategic plan.
How were they going to help the council be successful?
All of our decisioning should be surrounding those strategic
goals, and if it doesn't align with one,
it shouldn't be approved.
So,
that's a good point.
When we decided
ahead of time
what our goals are,
how we're going to make decisions, how we're going to do criteria, what's the
criteria for us making the decisions, and you've documented that,
you communicated it, you've allowed people to
participate in developing this, that means when those actual
decisions are made, if you adhere to what you said you were going to do,
then it's less political. Right? Budgets are inherently
political because they're done in a political environment, and they're done by
elected officials most of the time.
And if you can have this framework ahead of time, and
everybody knows that these are the engagement rules that we're going to follow,
right, then when you come to making those actual
decisions, you're basing them on what you've already decided, that as a group,
we've decided this is what we're going to be held accountable to.
It's less political, and you can get rid of some of this conflict that happens.
Absolutely.
I know one of the worst experiences I ever had, and I forgot to mention
my aversion to one-on-one meetings during the department process
behind closed doors where budget decisions are made, and the public never knows
anything about it. Plus, all your department heads that weren't in the
meeting, they don't know what was decided either.
I had an ERP project that needed $3 million.
I had some ideas on how to get it. I put it in my budget.
And then the budget team had a one-on-one meeting with the public works
director, and they decided how to spend the $3 million.
It had nothing to do with what my project was or anybody else's project.
So, we're going to talk about transparency, but if you have these rules
decided ahead of time, that this is a criteria, these are the rules that we're
going to be held accountable, and you are honest and clear that
you're going to follow those rules, then I think you kind of diffuse the politics
and the conflict out of the budget. Not entirely.
Absolutely.
Okay, a few more rules.
Make sure programs reflect their true costs.
I was telling Janet a story about this class I taught for GFOA years ago where
students got a real on-the-job training type
experience building out new programs and what costs do
we have to think about, and it was for our homeless shelter in Costa Mesa that was
the case study.
It was actually a really great project, and I was mentioning it'd be great to teach
that class again to the newer generation of accountants coming in.
But one of the things that people often forget is when we have a capital project
being constructed, there are ongoing operating costs for that
project. Right? So sitting back, and
have the department do this, and then you guys can sit in on and help them
see the bigger picture of what you see come through AP.
What are those costs? Right? If you're going to build a new city hall, for
instance, and it's going to be bigger and better, the operating
costs are absolutely going to increase.
Factor all of those in and make sure it's disclosed.
Even if it doesn't hit this year's budget, make sure you include the ongoing
operating costs in your consideration.
Make sure the projects can actually get done.
This is under your capacity and staffing rule. Sorry.
Janet already mentioned this, we often approve all the glitz and glam projects that
we know are going to get us a win in the community, and then we don't have the
people to actually get those projects done.
We have this with a couple of budgets that we help produce for
semi-full service or full-service clients that we do accounting for, and this is
our number one challenge because their city managers want to budget it all.
And it's like, that's great, but you're never going to be able to accomplish 50% of
that because you don't have staffing.
And then your grant sustainability rule,
your grant-funded costs should be disclosed as one
timeDo your best to not
include staffing from an ongoing perspective
if it's grant funded. Operating costs
ongoing, if they're grant funded.
If they are, make sure you've accounted for those
separately, that that will revert to general fund
resources after the grant completes, because you don't want that to come as
a surprise and be a creep.
All right. Let's launch polling question two.
Does your organization have a budget playbook that defines the rules?
A, we have clearly defined rules. B, we have some, but most
are informal. Or C, we don't have rules because finance rules.
So let's start with C. How many in the room have no budget rules at all?
Okay. I'm kind of glad none of you raised your hands.
How about A, clearly defined rules?
I have one brave soul.
I'm actually not surprised that you have some.
What do you mean by clear?
That they're written. We'll say written.
I think if it's clear, it's got to be some level of detailed written rules
to play by.
And then I'm guessing everybody else in the room is, we have
some rules, but most are informal. Is that fair?
Yeah.
How many of you feel like that's maybe where a lot of the
challenges with your departments come in?
Yeah.
So
sometimes, and I'm glad there's no city managers on this call
or in this room, sometimes the city manager is not our friend.
They're always our friend, but during budget season, they are not our friend
because of the behind
closed doors, one-on-one meetings.
The
police chief will go in and will state his case, and we have to
have overtime, and you don't want crime creeping in.
And if anybody Googles me, you'll find articles about this
because this happened to us in Costa Mesa,
and it's the behind the door closed meetings that are
not transparent that create the biggest
challenges. Because if we don't have rules,
if we don't set the expectation from the very beginning,
then by the time we get to decision making, it feels
impossible. The city manager's role is to make the decisions on what
the ultimate goals of the organization are, and we're here
to help them with that, right? We're here to tell them what those fiscal impacts of
those decisions will be.
Sometimes the city manager just closes the door and makes the
decisions themselves and says, "Here,"
and tells us to just put it in play.
And it feels like we're the ones who aren't being transparent
with the departments. We're the ones who violated the rules.
Biggest challenge being in charge of budget, if I'm being
honest.
So by having this all laid out, by having your timelines laid
out, by having your priorities,
and having this meeting where you can truly make sure everyone's on the same
page,
by the time you launch into budget development,
it feels much better. And then if you have a
software where you truly are able to be transparent,
then it makes it so much easier to feel like everyone's on the same team
and nothing's being hidden, and there's no
back office meetings where they're bargaining for more money,
because all of it's out in the open.
So,
in this PowerPoint, we gave you some decisioning tests for
you to be able to ask yourself, are we able to say yes to
these?
And if you are, then that means that
you have put good rules in place,
they've been communicated effectively, and you're in a good
place to proceed with budget. If you answered no,
then
you may want to consider deferring the item, excluding
it, parking lot, bike rack,
all that good jazz.
All right.
This
is a true statement.
If you plan ahead and you create predictability for your departments,
they will absolutely trust you.
That is critical.
So let's talk about transparency. Janet, you want to go through the departments?
Sure.
We're at a speed it up people, so we got about 10 minutes.
We've got 10 minutes left, and we're going to talk about transparency for the rest
of the presentation. This is transparency with your department.
So it's between the budget team and the departments that you are engaging with
in order to develop the internal guts of your budget.
These are your internal stakeholders.
One of the first things you want to do is share with this group
what the financial constraints are.
How did you project your revenue, what the outlook is?
What are the structural gaps?
Give them a sense of what the constraints are on
growth, on staffing, and on new programs so that they understand
that.
Required
cost increases, make sure you've communicated with them.
I know in my experience
is that we would develop a
matrix that shows what labor costs are going up with the pension
rate increases, healthcare costs,
internal service rates, what departments can expect
to those rates to be done. So in December and
January, we were doing a lot of that work behind the scenes
before we got in front of our departments so they understood exactly what our
costing constraints were and how things were going to look different for the next
fiscal year.Let them know about reserves.
When it comes to certain departments and they want to
fund a pilot project or
add more staffing or purchase capital assets,
the last thing they want to talk about is, well, we need to fund reserves first.
So I think it's imperative that we know what reserves we
need, and there's a lot of discussion going on right now
on that it's not just a flat 25%
or 16.67%, two months revenue or
expenditures. We're now looking at being strategic.
Just as a side note, one of the things that I've seen is we have a budget
surplus, and so we'll fund reserves out of that budget
surplus. We have a budget deficit, and we'll cut expenditures, and we never
fall back on the reserves. And I know I kind of skipped over on the
slide. I got all carried away.
You really look at your budget policy every year, your fund balance
policy, and your reserve requirements to make sure not only that
you're reviewing and editing those as times change, but you get that in
front of your council, you get that in front of your departments.
These are your rules of engagement. It starts with those three documents.
Make sure you're using pre-established criteria to evaluate budget requests.
We've already talked about that. I think alignment with the
goals is the most important thing,
as well as cost sustainability.
I've seen a lot of times where we'll decide to
do something a little bit different, and then we'll just barrel in with it and with
never an opportunity to discuss that in three years, we're not going to have the
money to be able to fund this. And then communicate
trade-offs honestly.
I think in developing trust in our engagement,
one of the things that we need to address is not just being honest.
I'm not saying that people lie. Well, they do, but
I'm not saying that they lie. But what happens a lot is
they will
just parrot what somebody else in the room said, so you don't really get what they
honestly think. Or a lot of times,
you can probably know who in the room won't say
anything. They're too embarrassed to speak up. They're shy.
They're afraid that somebody will disagree with you.
Maybe they're conflict avoidance.
If you know who those people are and you know that they have something to
say, try to pull them aside and have a one-on-one meeting with them so at
least you are informed, and then you can guide that discussion through the group
without putting them out in front and getting them
into an uncomfortable situation.
And then find opportunities for budget conversations
throughout the day, throughout your
regular work that you do.
Discuss that alignment, discuss sustainability, and communicate
trade-offs. I'll see if there's anything else.
I think with your departments, probably the biggest takeaway here is make sure
you've set what the clear policy boundaries are.
You want to give them enough autonomy.
It's shown that when departments have the ability to
decide how they're going to spend their resources, maybe they don't
decide on what their total budget is, but they get to decide how much they're going
to put in office supplies
or fuel, then they have more autonomy over
their budget development. And you'll have less conflict,
you'll have more commitment to the organization and less commitment to their own
department, and they won't find devious ways, even in a
very honest way, to circumvent some of the things that you're trying to do with
your budget. I think that's really important.
I stood in front of the podium, my first budget in Mono County.
We were late doing it, and we got in front of there.
I got grilled for three hours on how I budgeted
fuel on every single budget unit. Well, now we'd probably talk about it because
can you believe it? Gas is like $8 a gallon.
And Mono County was in the paper because I think they have the highest--
I don't buy gas there. That's where the tourists buy gas.
But anyways, I was grilled on how we budgeted this
very minor line item in our budget, as opposed to
maybe we should've been talking about the consulting budget or the
staffing levels. There are bigger things that we could have talked about.
Yeah.
Thank you.
There you go.
Oh, there were a couple more.
Make budget changes traceable. Close the loop after adoption. Oh.
That's okay. Keep going.
Okay. This is what gets us in trouble sometimes.
I just talked to a colleague who's a finance director out in the desert,
and this is the one that she feels like she doesn't have all this
control over because it's a lot of the city manager making some of the
decisions. But then the departments are like, "Well, what did you change in my
budget?" Making sure that you're able to close the
loop, you meet with each department and their staff
after the final decisions are made so that they understand what was
approved and what wasn't because they're going to want to make sure that if it was
something that was a high priority, maybe it's something that gets considered next
year.
You know the easiest way to accomplish that is never make the changes
yourself. Give them back to the department and have them make the changes.
Have them do it.
And make sure you build in time to be able to do that.
And again, that's where a good software solution comes in handy because you're
not using these archaic Word and Excel documents that allow
you to have it just in this tiny team, and they're the only ones who know
how to work through it.
Again, another transparency test for you to consider as you're making some of
these improvements in your team.
Polling question three: Does your organization struggle with the departments
feeling included in the decisioning process? Yes or no? How about yes?
Do you feel like maybe the departments complain about it?
About not being involved in what was approved and what wasn't
approved?
So
give me a yes if you hear from your
departments.Yeah, decent amount.
I feel like some of you are like, "Yeah, some departments, but not all
departments."
I think the one, and this department head was not
wrong.
He was our community development director in Costa Mesa and he said, "Look, at the
end of the day, give me a target.
Let me decide what gets approved in my budget and what doesn't.
Just tell me what your target is."
And I thought that was really interesting because that took the
decision, Jan and I actually talked about this at lunch yesterday, if you give
them the ability to control what they spend, but you tell them this is the limit,
most of the time, they'll stay within that limit.
What they don't like is someone else making the decision of what gets approved and
what doesn't, when that person doesn't have the full picture.
Hey, just a funny story. I know we're almost out of time.
But I did this for a couple budget cycles in
Mono County and I was working with the DA, and so I gave him a limit on what he
could spend in his budget. And he complained to no end, "I can't possibly be
able to run my department on that. That is unreasonable.
You can't do that. You're cutting my budget." And so when he submitted the budget
to me, he left like
25% of what I gave him on the table. He didn't even put it in his
budget. So I offered it to him. I said, "Well, if you really need to do that, would
it be okay if I put this in your budget?" And it totally changed the
conversation and the relationship.
Yep.
All right, I'm going to go through transparency with your governing body.
How many of you have a very active involvement from your governing body
for budget?
Noah's raising his hand in the back because he does budget for some folks.
How many of your council members, boards, they just adopt what
you present?
You all are so lucky.
So here are some ways that you can be more transparent with your governing body.
Create structured opportunities for them to give input.
Just like we're creating that one meeting for the departments and for our
internal planning,
don't violate the Brown Act, but have some intentional meetings with the
council members early on. Let them know where our revenues are projecting at.
Excuse me. Set that tone early on,
because if you don't, they're going to come out with all of their crazy
asks before you've even had an opportunity to get started with the team.
Use mid-year to build credibility
and understanding of the financial situation.
Most of us do mid-year February-ish. Some do it in March.
But that's an opportunity to start talking about the next year's budget cycle
and start talking about where we're at.
Present to them the budget plan, talk to them about early revenue
forecasts. That's a good opportunity
to start the conversation early.
Really important, use plain language.
Don't overcomplicate it. Don't start talking about trends and
forecasts.
Show them, "Hey, historically, we've seen about
5% increases in our utilities, specifically
in gas.
We're seeing a much larger increase this year." Help them understand that, right?
And tell them stories to help them equate it to their personal lives.
I had a council member once equate my pooled cash
to reconciling his checking account.
He was 24.
A brand-new city council member.
I'm pretty sure he didn't have a whole lot going through that checking account.
Pooled cash for a $200 million entity, it's just like that.
But what it gave me the opportunity to do was talk to him about, "Yeah, it actually
is,
but imagine, like, 500 bank accounts.
That's the volume of transactions.
And then you're trying to reconcile them all as one.
And you got to get it perfect." Use stories to be able to equate it to their real
lives.
Talk to them about the budget decisions, not just in numbers, but
the impacts.
What are the benefits to the community that they're going to see?
Especially in districts, like in District 2, we're going to see this
happen.
That's important to individual council members, right?
Communicate. I mentioned to communicate financial constraints.
Provide a summary of the direction received to stakeholders and
governing body to confirm your understanding.
So we're sitting in a meeting, we're going crazy with notes.
We're trying to get all the information from them.
But one of the most powerful things we can do is repeat it back
to them, and, "I just want to make sure I'm understanding this.
Is it fair to say that this is probably your highest priority?"
Because maybe they didn't say it like that, but that's your understanding, and you
want them to tell you, "Yes, it's our highest priority."
Because if you assume it, and you present your prelim budget with it,
and it wasn't their highest priority, you're having a very interesting
study session.
Another governing body test. I didn't mention these scorecards.
These are actually really cool for you to be able to assess the
transparency levels. They're all in your slides. I'm not going to go through them.
And the very final part, transparency with the community.
How many of you hold community events where you seek
feedback on priorities in your community?
Two, three,
four of you. Five, six, seven. There's a few more.
It's scary because we always have those few that are going to show
up and are going to beat us over our utilities or our gas
costs.
I am new to being in an HOA,
right? Seems silly.
This HOA is building a parking lot in the middle of a sports field, and why
they would build a parking lot when the parking lot is never, ever full is beyond
me.
If they would've just asked the community what was important to us,
it would've been great to see, hey, we sought community feedback, and here are
the five things that were the most important.
So while some folks were looking at a parking lot, we're going to go ahead and
fund these firstIt feels better
as a member of the community when your opinion feels like it matters.
Even if you don't participate in the survey, if you don't come to the meeting,
it feels better knowing they gave you the opportunity.
So sometimes just doing it
has a big impact.
You could actually have some fun with this.
Like the budget game, so we created these buckets with the priorities
on them, and then we gave everybody Monopoly money.
I have the Monopoly money now. They gave it to me when I retired.
And so we would do one community-
Did you guys see it, Rachel?
... where they basically come out with pitchforks.
They're very passionate about their community.
And we asked them to spread their dollars, public safety,
fire,
community... We had a paramedics division, so emergency medical services.
And so they would come, and they'd put it all in the emergency medical services.
That's all they wanted the county to do was just that.
And
one, it's not realistic because we still have to do all of the other stuff.
We're mandated to do it. But you get the sense through that
process what's important to that community.
Yep.
How many of you do a budget in brief?
Guys.
So the beauty of a budget in brief, our budget documents are
250 to 300 pages thick, right? And damn, are we proud of those budget
books.
My favorite thing, I still have all my budget books, by the way, even though I
don't work for a city anymore.
Having that budget in brief gives the community a
manageable document that they can read, that helps
them understand what my community is going to be doing.
Even if you do a community meeting, or you're doing a
survey and you're asking for feedback,
have a one-pager that talks about the revenue
streams and talks about the priorities from city council,
and it gives them a location of where they can send
feedback or points them to the budget website to get more
information.
Those little things have big impacts because at the end of the
day, people just want to feel like they're being heard.
All three of these transparency sections, we've got departments, we've
got electeds, and we have our community.
The reason we have relationship issues with all three of
those during the budget process is because we haven't provided the
opportunities for them to be heard.
Doesn't mean they have to get what they want.
They just have to feel like they're being heard.
A recurring theme.
Polling question number four, because we're very late. I'm sorry.
I think we're out.
We are holding you from lunch. Does your organization struggle with departments
feeling included in the decisioning process? Yes or no.
Why do I feel like this is the same as the last one?
All right.
That's it?
Questions?
Ooh.
No, everyone's like, "No, I want lunch."
Either we put everybody to sleep or we're very comprehensive.
Do we have any questions, Rachel, from online? Okay. Any in the room?
I know we all want lunch.
Yes, Mr. Matt.
Just a quick question on the community meetings that were mentioned.
Would you recommend that those would be led by the city manager in finance, or do
you think those should be led by the council
to gather that feedback? Is there a specific
part-
I think-
... of the Brown Act that I know it would have to be public and post because
they're-
They're usually a public meeting. They're usually fine.
Yeah.
I will say in my experience-
I think you have some Brown Act issues if you have, was it
three, John, Ning, or Mike? It's three.
If you have three members there, then that's considered a violation of the
Brown Act. If you don't have agenda, you haven't publicized agenda 48
hours before the meeting, et cetera.
I also think that your constituents might be
more willing to be honest and with
clarity if your council members aren't there.
We had council members there, but I want to say we had
very clear rules.
Their districts.
This was before districting, so that's fair.
I want to say our city attorney gave very clear rules,
that they were able to engage from a,
"Hi, how are you?" member of the community, but they were not able to engage in the
conversation at all. They were there simply to listen.
Yeah.
But I actually agree. I think they will participate more
if the electeds aren't there.
Repeat your question for me one more
time. Just say it to me. It's fine.
Oh. Just wondering who, who'd you recommend lead the meeting?
Oh, that's right. I had a great point, and I lost it.
So my community meetings were always led by us, finance,
and the city manager, and
the mayor.
If you know, you know.
But I actually think the departments
leading is better because it's ultimately the
departments who are trying to seek what the community's priorities are-
Mm-hmm
... and how they can help the community achieve those goals.
So I actually think engaging your departments, again, let's go back to
transparency, inclusion, feeling heard,
I think that actually will help with the relationship with the departments, too.
Yeah. I guess maybe we could change the question.
Who should participate in putting on those meetings as opposed to leading them?
And I think your executive team-
Team. Yep
... your finance team, and department representatives are
who should be there.
I think, we're kind of looking for some strategies from you because one of our
biggest... Well, I think we're pretty transparent about what our situation is,
where we're at revenues expenditure-wise, or what are we rejecting.
But getting the departments to be realistic about what they can get done in a year,
and not adding contingencies to everything.
We've tried giving them a contingency account to say, "Hey, this is your
riskcatch-all, be more realistic about your numbers, but they still
try to sneak in those contingencies.
What kind of strategies to get them to rein in of what they realistically can get
done in a year or be more true with their numbers?
I think one of the things Janet brought up to me yesterday is
that target. Give them a target of
where you think their numbers should come in at.
Say their prior budget was $12 million,
and realistically, based on what you've seen with the budget for the year,
you think a $13 million budget is reasonable, and
I mean all-in salaries and benefits, all that.
If you tell them, "Hey,
yes, we're going through priorities.
Yes, we're looking at what we need to fund, but realistically, this
is all I have.
I can't fund anything more than this."
And let them decide, even if they decide that within that $13 million, they're
going to fund things that they can't realistically get done.
One of the rules of engagement is what happens if they
don't do it?
How do we deal with
budgeted items
where departments try to bait and switch because they're
not going to be able to get to that, so they just want to spend that money on
something else? If that's one of your rules, and if there's
clear communication around, "Hey, totally fine if you budget it, but I just want to
be clear, if
you can't get that project started, it doesn't mean you can use that money on
something else."
Then I think you're going to have a little bit less of that.
I think they're trying to eat up
more so that they can have their slush funds.
Yeah, I think also educate your council or your elected
governance on what these rules are.
You're budgeting this amount to deliver this level of
service, and when you have that department that comes in at
mid-year or on an off month, between budget
milestones, and they ask for a whole bunch of other stuff that wasn't
discussed on the budget that we just adopted a month ago, make sure your
council understands these rules and
can navigate those so that when this happens and gets in front
of them, they can call it out. However it is that they want to do that
in the politics of your jurisdiction.
All right. We're still at lunch, as well, so if anybody has any other
questions, come find us at lunch.
Mr. Ryan?
All right. Thank you so much for that awesome presentation.
I'm sure we're feeling a lot more empowered about budget at this point, but
probably hungry as well. So we have a lunch break that we're going to go to and
come back at 12:30, but before we do that, it is time for the first raffle
of the day. So Rachel is bringing up the list of
names, and in true audit partner fashion,
I had my staff do the random sampling on who's going to
be the lucky person who gets to do the drawing.
So Jeannie from Riverside Public Utilities, where are you at?
She just gets to pick. She's the lucky person who gets to pick.
Mariana Sanchez.
Congratulations.
All right. Well, that is it. So as far as the lunch
escape route,
if you were with us last year, you probably remember we did this thing where we did
a hook right. Don't do that this year.
Go out the main doors, go to the lobby of the hotel, and the
seating area, if there's place settings set up, that's where you can have a seat
and start
getting food on the plates. So thanks, and we'll reconvene at 12:30.
If we're going to dispose of them, we take an auction and sell them off.We've
already taken a lot off of our books at that point because they've been fully-
Just disposed of, yeah
... appreciated. So does that have to be reported as held for sale because we're
selling them at an auction?
No.
Okay. I didn't think so, but I wanted to make sure of that.
No. It's literally stuff like
property or land or something like that.
Yeah.
Yeah. But just general disposal of vehicles wouldn't qualify.
I didn't think so, but I'm like, do we have to start reporting that if we know that
we have a vehicle that we're dispo-ing on July 1st?
No.
But it was on the books as of June.
Nah, that's not the intent.
That's what I thought, though.
For sure.
Okay.
Are we good? Okay, cool.
Welcome back, everybody. Welcome back.
It is 12:32,
so we're going to get started in a minute.
I know
quite a few are still filing in, so we'll give them another
second.
Welcome back. Welcome back.
Hmm. So how was lunch? Was it okay?
Good. So everyone is nice and full and ready to
take a nap and not going to listen to anything I'm saying, right?
All right,
perfect. That's just the way I like it.
All right. Welcome back, everybody.
If you're still coming in from lunch, we are going to go ahead and get started.
I found the clicker this time, so that's a mega positive.
I didn't know this was up here earlier.
So
we're going to go ahead and move on to
what I hope is a somewhat useful presentation talking
about pensions. And if you're here thinking I'm going to explain to
you how to do your GASB 68 journal entries, I'm sorry,
that's not the point of this presentation, and we'll have to schedule a
consultation at another time.
The idea here today is to give you tools
to talk with your electeds, with your
GMs, city council members,
generally about what are we doing with this stuff?
How are we fairing compared to
peer governments? And what are some of the tools that we
may have tried in the past to solve the pension situation,
and have they worked?
But as is custom for me when I give a presentation, I always
start with my terrible stand-up routine on the topic at hand.
So bear with me, and if they're really cringey,
I'm sorry. I tried. So the first one is pensions are
amazing. They are the only place where fully funded
is treated like the mythical creature people claim existed
in the '90s.
All right. Not great.
Did not hit. What about this one? A pension is basically a time machine
for money. You give us cash now, and future you can worry about whether it
was enough.
That one's better. All right. Last one. See how we do here.
A pension actuary's favorite trick is turning people
living longer into everyone in the budget meeting starting to
sweat profusely.
There we go. That's a good one. All right.
Thanks for putting up with that.
So just a little bit about me. For those of you who have not met me, hi, I'm
Ryan. I'm one of the partners at LSL in the
audit
department. I've been with the firm now for about 14 years, and over that time,
done audits pretty much my whole career.
Some other things I'm doing these days is I am with the new audit quality
standards that came out last year.
I've been designated our government division's audit quality leader.
It doesn't mean that my audits are the best, although I think they are.
It means I'm responsible for overseeing that our audits are meeting all of the
quality standards for the department.
I currently work with over 30 different clients.
A lot of you are here in the room, so good seeing you
again.
And so as far as other professional recognitions, volunteer work I
do,
I've been recognized by AICPA for data analytics and audit,
but primarily for single audit planning and execution.
Volunteering, I work with the GFOA as part of the special review committee
for the Award in Excellence in Financial Reporting program.
So ACFRs get submitted to me throughout the country, and I provide feedback.
Those wonderful GFOA comments that you get on your ACFRs each year,
I'm one of them who's doing it.
Been involved at CSMFO as a speaker and trainer at a number of events, and on a
personal note, I am married, and I have two children, ages five and seven,
and a couple of pets, a pug and a cockatiel.
So see some pictures here. I went to Disney for the first time
this past year with my kids. They had a blast.
It was a rainy, pouring day, but it was so much fun.
We went to Star Wars Land, too. So
sorry, one more joke. It's terrible.
If you've been on the-- what is the ride with-- Rise of the
Resistance. If you've been on Rise of the Resistance, there's that one line in
there where Admiral Ackbar is all like, "May the Force be with
you."
And I'm sitting in there, and I quietly say to myself, "And also with your
spirit."And for those of you who are Catholic or
Christian, you got that joke immediately. The dude next to me just died laughing.
It was pretty funny.
So I'm really into fishing, and my son is now into it too.
So that's his first fish that he caught, and my daughter in her dance recital.
And then my wife and I went to Montana last year and did
horseback riding in Yellowstone, which was amazing.
So enough about me. Let's talk about what you're actually here and
care about, and that is our pension system.
So a couple of things that I want to do today is we're going to relive
the trauma of 2015 together when we did the implementation of GASB
68. We're going to see what changed, and then we're going to review the
trends over the past 10 years. We're going to discuss some measures that
certain governments are taking to relieve their pension liabilities and
put some of that pressure elsewhere, and then provide you with tools
so that you can take back to your governing bodies and help
discuss these items with them. I don't know about you, but every time I give a
city council presentation or a board of directors presentation about
the audit, the number one question I get is about
pensions.
It's like, "How are we doing? Is the pension growing? Is it getting better?
Is it getting worse?" There's other questions I get, but without fail,
that is the question I get, so I always talk about it.
So that's the agenda for today. Hope you walk away with some tools
and feel empowered to talk to those who always ask the
questions.
So the first thing we're going to do is we're going to go back in time to 2015
and the pension crisis. So I remember driving
home from work back in the pre-COVID days, when you sat in the car
for 40 minutes and commuted,
listened to a political broadcast, and they were talking about the
state of California's pension crisis.
GASB 68 had just come out, and the state of California had just
issued their first ACT or that had incorporated GASB
68 into it.
Excuse me. And the commentators were going
absolutely ballistic over it because there was this
massive liability that just hit the books. We all knew it was there.
It was hidden in the footnotes. But now that it's on the books, everyone went
absolutely crazy. Accused the state of mismanagement every which
way.
Sky was falling. We're never going to be able to pay for this. What do we do?
So, and I'm sure that was probably the case for most of your organizations when it
first hit.
Excuse me.
So why did GASB issue Statement 68?
It actually predated a lot of the commentary, although we were aware of it at
the time. But GASB identified a number of problems.
One was they felt like the current statement at the time
did not appropriately address the pensions.
They felt like Statement 27 hid the liabilities
in the footnotes. Nobody really knew what that amount was unless they read
it.
So they did some research findings, and they updated the framework, and they really
wanted to highlight what the pension liability was front
and center to bring more transparency to the issue and hopefully
resolve some of it.
Really struggling. Jeez.
Okay.
So ultimately, at the end of the day, they concluded that GASB 27 was
inadequate, and it was time to replace it with something better.
So what GASB 68 did was it put everything on the books.
We now have a full net pension liability on the books.
There is a standardized way of calculating that liability.
So
actuaries in California have to do the same thing that actuaries in New York
or Texas or Arizona.
All of them follow the same process, so it enhances comparability between the
governments.
It wants us to disclose our discount rate, be more realistic
about what that discount rate is and what's being used to calculate it.
And then, of course, it added no less than 20 pages of note disclosures to
your statements,
which I'm sure we're all big fans of, and we know what every word in them means,
right?
I don't. So what changed?
In short,
everything.
Your statements went overnight from something that
probably looked okay, and we'll get to that in an example here in a second, to
something that has probably hundreds of millions of dollars in liability on the
books,
and then 20 more additional pages of notes.
So you can see this example here. It's one of my clients back in the
day.
If you look down in the unrestricted, and I apologize that it's small,
pre-GASB 68, they had a unrestricted net position of about
$128 million. It's pretty good. It's pretty healthy reserves.
Looks pretty solid. No complaints.
Next year.
Again, it's small, and I'm sorry. It went to a deficit, $82
million in the governmental activities.
So overnight, your statements probably went from looking
positive,
we have reserves, everything's functioning, to,
oh, no, we're in trouble. We don't have enough money to do anything these days.
So first
question is, how have you all fared?
Was that your story? So for those of you online, this is your opportunity to take a
polling question. But for those of you, was that example in the
previous slide, is that your organization's story?
What, yes?
Okay, seeing lots of hands.
No?
Okay.
And then I have a lot of non-committals.
So,
what I wanted to talk about today was a research study
that I did earlier this year.
And I got to give some credit to my buddies and friends over
at the city of Santa Monica. I was actually at their audit subcommittee meeting,
which gave me the idea for this presentation, because it was a hot topic from one
of their committee members.
And so props to you guys. Thank you.
So really what I wanted to do was take a look at all of our clients, all of LSL's
clients, and see how are we fairing.
What has been the trend over the last 10 years, and give you all the
tools and knowledge to say, "Hey, for other cities
that are similar in size and scope to my organization,
how am I doing compared to them?"
And take that information to your elected officials and that sort of thing, because
that was something they really wanted to know.
So I did this in April of this year.
I surveyed every single one of our government audit clients.
So no one was exempted, and really what that ultimately came
to was about 60, a sample size of 60, which in audit world is
absolutely perfect. That is the high risk sample size that we
typically use is 60.
So the stars aligned, and I got a perfect audit sample. It was great.
So the thing I did too was break it out into two primary categories.
We have
at LSL majority either cities and then special districts or other
clients.
The majority of you fall within the city bucket, but there's the other
category. And one thing I noticed as I was evaluating the data is
that your special districts and counties don't really
correspond to what's happening at cities.
They're a little bit different. So it was probably appropriate to stratify
that data out and put the cities in their own category and then
everyone else in their other category.
I'll get into it further, but we looked at the data
in further stratifications into other categories, which I'll show on future slides.
But to really identify significant trends
and pension metrics that you can use, it was the goal of this research.
So the three primary metrics I looked at was one, the
change in the average net pension liability over the years.
I also looked at the average annual employer contribution.
So how much are you sending to CalPERS or your
other organization that,
what do you call it, administers your pension.
Which in this room there was two of you probably.
So most of you are in CalPERS, so that made it kind of easy.
And then we looked at the average funding status.
So those are the three metrics that I looked at.
Within each one, broke it out into different categories.
So for those in the first category, the
first metric, the pension liability, I looked at total employee
compensation as a way of dividing between small, medium, large
organizations. So small governments, if you have less than $10
million in payroll a year, or if you have less than $10 million, you're small,
$10 to $100 million, medium size, greater than $100 million
in payroll, then you're considered large for the purposes of this study.
The other two metrics we looked at were stratified by plan type and then
employees covered. So
if your safety versus miscellaneous plans and then your
agent multiple employer plans versus your cost-sharing plans.
So let's take a look at the cities first.
So in aggregate, our pension liabilities have increased about
35%
since the implementation.
Probably not a great surprise to anybody in the room.
So if your pension liability is similar in scope, you're
not alone. That's probably accurate across the board.
How it hit a little bit differently, though, was when you broke it down by
different categories. So if you're a smaller organization with
about $10 million or less in payroll,
you saw about a 48% increase. So your average liability
probably went from about $6 million to about $8.5 million at the end of the day,
which was actually kind of interesting.
I would not have thought that the smaller cities had the larger comparative
increases compared to a large organization.
But across the board, that seemed to be the trend.
Medium-sized cities, so between $10 million and
$100 million, saw a similar increase in the pension liability.
And you can see that it went from about 67 and two-thirds to about
98.4 million.
Large cities, those of you with $100 million or more in payroll, went
about 26% up, so about a quarter increase,
to almost about $485 million on average.
So as I was putting together the metrics and breaking out small, medium,
large, I know the medium sounds like a big range, $10 million to $100 million
compared to the other two ranges.
But really when I looked at it, it kind of added up.
There was a big difference in a city at $90
million versus $110 million in terms of
payroll. It was actually a striking difference.
So that's why the metric kind of worked for this particular study.
But across the board, our small and medium-sized cities went up
more than our larger cities. And I have a theory for that I'll get
to in a second.
Here it is charted out. And you can see it broken out here that our small
organizations are kind of a drop in the bucket ultimately compared to the
others.
So the next item was the average pension cost.
Now, I probably don't have to tell you all in this room that your pension costs are
going up every year, right?
Your normal costs, employer contributions, the rates
keep going up and up. So this is going to be no surprise to you,
which is to be expected.
And when we break it down by plan type, if you're part of an agent multiple
employer plan, you saw about a 45% increase.
If you're part of the cost-sharing plan,
about a 44% increase. So really no difference
between the two different types of plans.
However, when you look at it by classification, miscellaneous
employees went
up 61% from about
19% to 31 in 2025. And then the safety
plans increased 42% as well. Again, not probably a
great surprise, but that's the breakdown here.
So your costs are going up. Miscellaneous plans used to be the
cheaper ones. But they've actually seen the higher rate of increase than the
safety plans.
And you can see that charted out here.
That was actually the most interesting thing to me is that,
I would have expected the safety plans to just keep going up and up, because
safety employees, they're putting their lives on the line for us,
keeping the community safe, fighting fires, things like that.
Typically, they're more expensive, but interestingly enough, it was that the
miscellaneous employees had the higher rate of change.
So what about our funding status? So one, they're becoming expensive,
so we're contributing more and more each
year. But our pension plans are just not being
funded at the same rate. So that's
an unfortunate side effect of things just not working out the
way that it's currently set up is our agent multiple employer
plans. If you're part of one of those or sponsoring one of
those,
you had just a mild 8% increase over the last 10 years of funded
status, probably.
Not a ton. Our cost-sharing plans, even less, only about
4%. And that's primarily due to our cost-sharing plans being tied to
CalPERS a lot more closely than our agent plans are.
A lot of you with agent multiple employer plans, you have a lot more discretion
about what you put in, and any money you put in is essentially
your money. It's in your bucket. Whereas in our cost-sharing groups,
not as much. It goes into the group bucket, and your allocation
may or may not reflect any additional contributions that you make.
When you look at it by employee classification, the miscellaneous plans typically
are about 80% funded, and that's about a 10% increase from
2016.
Safety plans basically stayed flat.
They didn't go up,
but more than 3% on average. So
we probably already know this, but this
is where we're landing at this point.
You can see the results here, the
miscellaneous plans, the funded status going up while the safety
more or less remaining the same.
So let's go to polling question number two.
How many defined benefit pension plans does your organization sponsor?
So for those of us in the room, one?
Okay. Two?
Three or more?
Okay, you got a few. What about zero?
Is anybody lucky and doesn't have to be here and can be getting more
snacks out in the lobby?
All right.
So that's our cities.
Overall, probably nothing that we didn't already know,
but where things get interesting is in our other governments.
So if you're a special district or a county,
there are some differences here, interestingly enough.
So again, we use the same metric of the payroll size being the
driver of how large and complex the organization is.
Similar to the cities, our smaller districts and counties
averaged a pretty significant increase actually, which was
surprising. It went up 88%, which is much higher than what we
saw in the cities. In fact, all of the
special districts, which I keep picking on you guys because you were actually
the main driver for this,
comparatively speaking. The counties were a little more stable,
like cities were, but the special districts just went
bananas on the pension cost for some unknown reason.
So it went up 80% to 88% across the board, and
so
that's a big jump. The medium-sized governments went to
about $182 million liability, and then our large government's about
$414 million liability on average.
Pretty significant.
So you can see that broken down here.
Where things also seem to be at a divergence from our
city organizations is the cost. So we all know that the costs are going
up, but the difference was very striking.
So in our special districts, primarily, the cost
that the employers are contributing on an annual basis went up at a way
faster rate than it was at the cities for
reasons that I'm not entirely sure of, to be completely honest.
I have a theory on it,
but I'm not convinced that that's true or not.
It's just my thought that a lot of anecdotal
evidence here, but from what I've seen at my clients, a lot of
people
at special districts tend to stay at special districts longer.
There's a little bit less turnover.
There's a lot more PEPRA employees, at least among my clients, at
cities and counties than there are at special districts.
So it might be a little cheaper.
Again, your mileage may vary. I don't know if that's true, but at least among
the people that I work with, that's what I'm noticing.When you
break it down by plan type, our agent multiple employer plans, again, they
increased 74%, went up a lot. Cost-sharing plans, again,
increased 160%. So that's very
significant.
When you look at it by the classification of employees, our miscellaneous employees
went up 125%, and safety plans increased 69.
So again, a unique thing. You would have thought that the safety employees would
keep getting more expensive at at least a similar rate,
but it wasn't. It was actually our miscellaneous employees.
So you can see the divergence here, particularly around
2020-ish, where our cost-sharing plans became
more expensive, comparatively speaking.
And then our average employer contributions tend to be moving up at a similar
directional rate. So
when you look at it like this for our funded status,
again, just like the cities, there's not a lot of change here to your
funded status, even though it's getting more expensive.
Our agent multiple employer plans typically sit around 71%
funded,
but they actually went down about 2%.
The cost-sharing plans stayed completely flat, essentially, just a
very minor decrease, even though we're contributing more and more.
And again, when we look at it from the perspective of what employees are we
covering, our miscellaneous employees tend to be about 75% funded,
and our safety employees are about 71% funded.
Again, very flat, and there's been not a lot of movement in these
organizations.
All right, so what are the key takeaways?
I know that's a lot of data I just threw at you, but how can you use this?
Key things here is, one, larger cities, you guys, even though you have a
big liability on your books, when you compare it to
other organizations, your rate of growth of that liability has been
slower.
So you're in a slightly better shape, comparatively speaking,
in terms of percentages instead of raw numbers.
Our special districts, you guys unfortunately have been hit the hardest by GASB
68. Your liability went up a lot faster than other
organizations.
There have not been any significant differences.
So if you want to take the information to your council and you're a smaller
organization, and the other local organizations to you are maybe
special districts instead of a city or vice versa, it's actually pretty comparable.
So you can use them in your discussions with your electeds.
There was, however, a big difference when you're doing comparisons between
cities and special districts and counties at the
mid-size and larger level. So I would not probably encourage you to
take information from-- If you're a
mid-size county, don't look at a city next door as a
comparative. That's probably not going to be the best information.
The other takeaway is you're not alone in battling this.
I know every single
mayor, elected official, board member, they're all thinking that
somehow, some way, we're unique, we're
underfunded, we're going to go underwater here in a second.
But what you can see from this is that everybody's in the same boat, and we're all
paddling in the same direction.
The other interesting thing here is even though there were a number
of our clients that employed specific measures, particularly
pension obligation bonds a few years back,
nobody had a net pension asset in 2025
for any of the plans that were sponsored by CalPERS.
There was, I think, one client that had a
pension asset, but it was in a peripheral plan that was closed.
So it doesn't really count. Excluded from the study.
So that's what I want to get at here is that the pension obligation bonds that were
issued a few years ago that we thought were going to help really haven't
helped a whole lot. The ones that did issue pension obligation
bonds, this bond is often still sitting on the books.
You are making those additional payments every year, and yet, because of changes in
actuarial estimates, CalPERS' poor performance, et cetera.
Now you have a bond on your book, and the pension liability is creeping back
up. So that wasn't quite the fix that we
were hoping that they would be.
So let's go to our third polling question.
So which of your pension plans has the larger unfunded amount?
Is it the one for your miscellaneous employees?
Safety?
We only have one, so this is irrelevant.
And we're lucky, and we don't have one at all. No pensions.
All right.
So that's the bad news. What's the good news?
What is our outlook looking like over the next course, so 5 to
10 years?
So in 2013, we had PEPRA take effect,
and the preliminary results on PEPRA is actually very promising.
Over the past course of its lifetime, PEPRA has already saved over
$5 billion in
employer costs. So that's been good.
Even though your costs are going up, it could have been a lot worse without PEPRA.
It's also projected to see over the next
10 years or so,
more positive improvements. So because of the lower
benefits
and the higher retirement age, that sort of thing, because our new
members that are coming in are actually paying for their portion of
the pension liability, which before they didn't have to do that,
and because PEPRA employees are now the majority, even though it's
about 60%, we still have 40% classic.
Even though they're now the majority, which means we're seeing even more savings as
more and more of them join.And then,
so what we're really looking at is probably over 25 billion in additional
savings and employer contributions over the next decade.
And
probably that's going to start hitting--
You'll start seeing those results probably in the next five to 10 years, is what
they're kind of projecting. So that's a very positive.
So what did it do? What are some of the structural safeguards that PEPRA built
in? Just by way of reminder, so now we have a pensionable pay cap built in
there. So it's capped at 146,000 for those who
are
also in Social Security. So that helps prevent excess
contributions for the pension plan.
There's mandatory cost saving, as I mentioned before, that employees
are now contributing to it. There's anti-spiking provisions built in
to help keep the contributions more level throughout the years.
There are lower per member liabilities, which has been
a positive. So if you look at the cost of a PEPRA employee
versus a classic employee, I mean, we're all aware they're less
expensive for us as organizations to pay for.
But there are some risks that PEPRA is currently facing.
One is there is legislative risk out there.
So slide calls out AB, I think it's
1383 as the main driver. But there
are risks out there wherein there's a lot of lobbying happening right
now to increase the benefits for
our public safety employees. Now, I get it, our public safety employees, they
do so much for our communities. They fight the
fires. They prevent crime. They respond to crime.
They keep our streets safe, that sort of thing, but they are very expensive as a
result. And so there is a more concerted lobbying
effort right now to increase those benefits.
And so should it pass, is that would undo a lot of what PEPRA has
accomplished. Another thing that's kind of coming into
focus is what they're calling the intergenerational equity
gap between PEPRA employees versus non-PEPRA
employees that are still in the workforce.
So there's this growing concern right now that
PEPRA employees are doing the same job as non-PEPRA employees,
but they're not getting the same pay, essentially is what it's coming down to.
So I'm not trying to start any fights. Please don't take it that way.
But that is a growing concern, is that people are not being compensated
equally for the same job performance.
So those are a couple of things we need to be aware of that could be on the horizon
that could jeopardize PEPRA. But overall, it's been a very positive
movement, and it's caused some good results over the last couple of years.
So what are we looking like? CalPERS has issued some of their
information
for 2025. So we got those preliminary results back.
And so if they keep hitting their discount rate at
6.8%, actuaries and
CalPERS are projecting to be basically reaching that
85% minimum funded floor by the early 2030s.
So we're looking at probably in the next five years or so, we should
be ideally hitting that 85% minimum.
However, as we know, CalPERS returns are not always on point.
As they keep reducing this discount rate, we're going to keep
seeing our costs going up, unfortunately.
So I would
probably
caution you against
putting in additional spending projects as you're going through budget season and
stuff like that, because your pension costs are likely to continue to go up over
the next couple of years until CalPERS reaches this funded
status.
So for 2025, and this is going to impact your 2026
ACTRS or financial statements, CalPERS had a good return.
They hit 11.6% in their investments.
So what that means for us is our net pension liabilities across the board
should decrease this year. So it went down a little bit, I
believe, last year.
And so we're going to have two years in a row of pretty strong performance.
So that liability should continue to go down on your statements because we're a
year behind.
All right. The other thing too, so they're going to be reevaluating their
asset allocation management
strategy every couple of years. So we'll probably be looking
at that, I believe, in another two years or so.
We'll probably see a new allocation strategy.
We've been using the same one now for, I believe, two or three years.
So that should be coming down the pipe.
So what are we going to do? How can we respond to all of that?
What we want to do is budget for elevated contribution
rates. A lot of you are in budget season, right, Matt?
Yeah. Great. You're in budget season right now, so keep in mind that your
rates are probably going to continue to increase.
You're going to have probably a push to make some supplemental UAL
payments, keep the costs down.
If you're not prepaying your UAL payment, I would encourage you to do it.
There's a significant cost savings on that.
I know it's a big chunk of money out of the gate, but it does help quite a bit in
your cost savings.
And then if there's any sort of lobbying efforts to
reduce your PEPRA
provisions, I would encourage you to resist those lobbyings and keep your
costs as low as you can.
Okay. So what are we going to tell our governing bodies?
That's a lot of information. I know it's probably a little dry, but
the whole point of giving you all that information is so we can
have good discussions with our electeds and
our boards and those types of people that might not be
as knowledgeable about this.The number
one thing to tell them is, "Don't panic."
Like I said, they see this $400 million liability on the books,
and then they just think the sky is falling.
So being the calm voice, the voice of reason
that this is something that is not unique to us, we are all
facing it together. It's a normal
part of being in local government and doing business in that way.
The other thing to explain to them is this is not a short-term
fix.
Employing short-term measures will only do so much.
This is a very long-term problem that's going to take long-term
planning
to resolve. It's not going to be fixed overnight.
So knee-jerk reactions when I'm sitting in council
meetings is like, "Whoa, we just need to contribute more.
We need to look into this. We need to look into that.
What are you doing?" That sort of thing.
It's something that needs thought and attention.
I think the initial knee-jerk reaction a few years ago probably was
the pension obligation bonds. Let's get them paid off, issue a bond.
Now we have a fixed payment while the liabilities crept back up.
So realistically, in my opinion, I don't think that there's much we're
really going to be able to do to control those liabilities until
PEPRA takes more and more of an effect and more and more
employees are on that because then everything should come down a little bit.
The other thing to talk to your
electeds is that pension liability is not a bond.
It is not a loan. Yes, it's $400 million.
No, you're not going to have to write a check for it tomorrow.
This is something that represents the payment for future
benefits if CalPERS were to go belly up,
which I know there's the thought out there that it could do that.
Yes, I guess in theory it could, but realistically, it's probably not going to
do that.
So explaining to them that this is not the same thing
as setting
money aside in a 401k. You look at your 401k, you say, "Oh,
well, I don't have enough money to retire on." That's true, but that doesn't mean
you should empty out your savings account to go super fund your
money market 401k or something like that.
It's not good personal financial management.
It's not necessarily the best decision for governmental financial
management.
Comparing yourself to other local governments is helpful.
So that's why I put all the nice little graphs and slides in here so you can take
that and show it to your
electeds, and they can see that
where you stand in comparison to other peer-sized
organizations.
And then carefully evaluate whatever steps that want to be taken to
reduce the pension liability. Again, this will be fixed over time.
This is not something that's going to be fixed overnight.
So really looking at the cost versus benefit of
whatever measures are being considered to reduce this.
Time gaps. They're a big question.
A lot of them do a very cursory review of your financial
statements, and they don't see the difference between reporting date, valuation
date, and measurement date.
So
they don't understand that the pension liability they're looking at is actually a
year old already. It's not super current.
So making sure that we're explaining to them the difference in the timing
of that liability of when you're reporting it versus the news they might be reading
about CalPERS in the news. So that happened a couple of years ago when
CalPERS had a good return, and yet for most of my organizations, the
pension liability went up, and they were very confused about that.
It's because the good returns that CalPERS got had not hit the
GASB 68 accounting reports yet. So that time gap is very important,
making sure they understand it.
And then as you're doing your presentations on the steps, I'm sure you already
are. I've sat in a lot of these presentations, and most of you all do
an amazing job here, but just keep giving them the most recent CalPERS information
as you're doing it so that way they can plan for the future and see how that is
proceeding.
But probably the best way of talking about it is to shift the
conversation away from this short-term knee-jerk
reaction metrics that, "Oh, well, we have this massive
liability on the books. We have to do something to pay it down."
You can provide a lot more confidence to your electeds and your boards by
giving them some metrics to show you how you're actually doing and the things that
probably matter a little more.
The first thing that I would recommend is what I'm calling the modified quick
ratio.
So you want to make sure that you're solvent, right?
You can pay your bills. If you can pay your short-term bills, your
contributions, your employer contributions, that's at this
moment more important than paying down a large liability at
the end of the day. So what I recommend to my clients is what I call this
modified quick ratio. So we all know what quick assets are.
It's our cash versus our receivables,
plus our receivables, just the stuff that we can convert into cash very
quickly.
And we're going to take that over our total liabilities, but take out
our net pension liability.
You can also take out OPEB if you have OPEB as well and you want to get a little
more of a true thing. You want this ratio to be greater than one.
And so this is what we use and what I use when I'm evaluating my
clients for--
We have to evaluate for going concern, making sure that you're going to be solvent
for the next 12 months or so. If we see a ratio greater than one
here, this tells me that if everything were to go belly up and all those
debts were to become due tomorrow, you have enough quick assets to actually pay for
it. So if you can explain it to your
electeds that no, we actually do have sufficient cash and investments and
receivables to cover our day-to-day activities, that gives them a lot more
confidence about the management of the finances,
and they might be a little less worried about
making those payments down the road.The other
one that I would encourage you to shift the focus on to is
reserves.
Reserves are kind of a big deal. There's a lot of discussion about
reserves in a lot of the financial reports that come out on
California agencies right now.
The GFOA has also issued what they consider to be their best practice
reserve amount.
And so we got to define reserves first.
So a reserve is not necessarily your full fund balance, your full net position.
It's what should be your spendable portion.
So if you're a city and you're looking at your general
fund, which probably should just primarily look at the general fund, is what is
your assigned fund balance and your unassigned fund balance.
Those two items are at management's discretion and available to
spend. Your committed and restricted, those
have strings attached and you can't always touch that.
And then, of course, non-spendable isn't even cash, so there's not much you can do
there.
So taking your spendable reserves, your assigned versus
unassigned,
and then if you're a proprietary government, that would be your unrestricted
net position.
And then divide that by your total expenditures.
How much did you spend in the last year for operating
activities? So your operating expenses, general government, public safety, thing
like that.
If that ratio comes out to be greater than 16%,
0.16, you've met the GFOA minimum of
two months of reserves. That is what we're striving to do.
So I know a lot of organizations right now are kind of struggling in
this area. I've worked with a number of clients that are a little bit on the low
side, so I would encourage you to find some cost savings to get
these reserves built up. A lot of organizations are taking
policies to their councils and boards for what they call
rainy day funds or things like that, money that's set aside to make
sure that they're meeting this 16% of reserves.
So what this tells your electeds at the end of the day is
we actually do have sufficient cash flows, not only to meet our
daily operations, but also put aside as a reserve for a future
problem.
That probably would give them a lot of assurance that not only
are we meeting our obligations, but as costs continue to
increase related to the pensions over the next couple of years, we have
sufficient reserves to continue to meet those rising costs.
So I would encourage a reframing of the conversation to go
away from this massive liability and look
at these metrics instead and show them, like, "Hey, we might actually not be doing
as badly as the pension liability would have us believe."
The other option that works pretty well from what I've seen, so I mentioned that
the POBs didn't quite have the impact that we were hoping they would, but
the Section 115 trusts. There's a lot of benefits to doing
Section 115 trusts. Primarily, it gives you a little more
control over the investments. You're not really
tied to CalPERS and how they're responding to it, their
investment strategy. There's a number of different
organizations that you can open a Section 115 trust with.
And what we've seen here is that these have kind of taken off.
A lot of organizations that have opened them, they've seen large increases
in the
trust. It's grown a lot over the years, comparatively speaking,
and it's a faster way of growing that amount to set aside for
future pension benefits, as opposed to just paying CalPERS each
month.
There are a little bit of some pros and cons here.
So obviously, I personally think the pros outweigh the cons.
You get more control, you get some transparency.
It smooths your contributions over the years.
But the con is you have yet one more thing to manage and take
care of and decide asset allocations on and things like that.
So it might be a little more
logistical work, but overall, at the end of the day, I do think that
the pros outweigh the cons. And if you have
not opened a Section 115 trust, I would encourage
you to consider it.
All right, so we have made it to our last polling question
of the day. So let's see if we're here and ready for attendance.
So
of all the things we talked about today, how are we paying for our pension
liability right now? Are we just doing a pay as we go, whatever CalPERS bills
us each month? That's kind of what we're doing. Thank you, Noah.
All right. Is anyone prepaying?
All right. That's everyone. Good. You guys are on it.
And then has anyone opened a Section 115 trust?
All right, cool. And then what about anything else?
Like we just don't fund the pension liability and... No. All right, cool.
So that does kind of bring us to the end of the presentation. Thank you.
What are your questions?
Awesome.
I just have to contribute.
Just out of curiosity, in the ones you've studied, have those who chose to
put the money just directly as additional payments performed better or
as far as their
debt ratio, or those who put in the 115 performed better?
Mm-hmm.
It kind of depends on the organization.
So for the smaller organizations that
are part of a cost-sharing pool, those additional payments
didn't make a lot of difference at the end.
Because it's part of the pool, it gets smoothed over.
What you contribute might not be what CalPERS credits all of it to
your account. So
for smaller organizations, the Section 115 trusts have been a lot,
I would say, more effective.
Other large organizations that have their own agent multiple employer plans,
whatever they contribute extra goes to that plan.
So there's no other organization that can touch it.
What you contribute reduces your liability down the road.
And so those that have contributed extra, which there weren't actually a ton,
interestingly enough, that did that, but the ones that did, did see a larger
reduction.than average.
There's two online? Okay.
Ryan, would you also deduct net OPEB liability from
total liabilities in the quick ratio metric?
Yes, I would recommend taking out the OPEB as well, because I didn't
specifically include it in here because it's the same thing as the pension,
conceptually speaking. So yes, if you wanted to use that
modified quick ratio metric, I would encourage you to take OPEB out as
well.
And then is there a problem with a reserve in the
40% range? I get a lot of questions how it was accumulated.
A reserve in the 40% range would be pretty amazing,
actually.
When I was looking at the reserves--
I look at reserves for about 30 different clients a year, and
40% is a rarely attained
percentage.
Especially for cities, mid-size cities in
particular,
40% would be an amazing metric to strive for.
So if anyone is hassling you over having 40% reserves,
they're probably hassling you
unnecessarily.
Any other questions?
All right. Finishing early.
So those are some references if you want to take a look at them and check my work,
but yeah, that's it. Thank you.
That was like 10:20? That doesn't seem right.
So yeah, we'll go ahead and take a 10-minute break.
It's kind of interesting going from a presentation back to MC, but
appreciate it. We'll take a 10-minute break and resume at
1:30.
Yeah?
Our break is next year.
Oh, nice.
Starting in October.
Oh, that's right. You're a two-year, aren't you?
Two year.
Yeah.
Trying to say that wrong.
Okay, I got it.
Thank you much.
Mm-hmm.
All right, everyone. Welcome back.
Hope you got some cookies and some
refreshments.
Going to need a Sprite or something after that last presentation.
My voice was just given out in the middle of it.
So thank you for your grace throughout that process.
All right, so welcome back. We have one more presentation for the
day.
So really quickly before Noah comes up and closes us
out, we do have in front of you a course evaluation.
Please
do that before you leave today.
It's very important to us to get your feedback and see how we did on the
topics and that sort of thing. It also directly corresponds with how
many audit findings you're going to get this year.
Just kidding.
All right, Noah, take it.
How are we all doing? I know I'm at the end of the day,
so sorry.
But
are you bringing me something? Thank you.
She's putting my timer on so I know when, how long I can keep you,
and how long I stand between you and going home.
No, I'm just kidding. Okay, let's get going on this.
Let's talk about what we're going to be learning today.
So
I'm going to admit, given the time of year we're in, most of us are in
budget and it's May, we're going to talk a little about year-end and all the
recurring processes we've done during the year to prepare
for year... No, there's nobody out here.
So I was actually going over this presentation with somebody else, and they're
like, "You look like you're going to scold everyone today." I'm like, "I'm not."
This is just really important stuff to me.
So
you ever hear your own voice and you're like, "Wow, that looks annoying." Look
at your own picture. That looks annoying.
I don't like that picture. Okay.
First about me. Let's first of all go Ducks.
Anyone a hockey guy? No? Hockey girl?
Ducks won last night. Heck yeah. But this is my beautiful family.
As you can see, I married up.
And quick story about me. I've seen year-end
closes, the month-end closes from all different angles.
I was an auditor, baby auditor. Have to admit, I probably started, I had no
clue what I was doing. Didn't even know what I was looking at.
But there was a lot of telltale signs that kind
of-appeared to me later on when I became older and
wiser. Then I was a finance director and I
lived in the trenches. I've lived the constraints.
I've seen the staffing, the crazy council meetings,
all the stuff that gets piled up for us.
Talk a little bit about that, the reactiveness that happens at year-end.
And now I'm a consulting director, so people call me when they
need some help, right? We put together month-end close processes
for clients. I've seen the good, the bad, and the ugly,
and I want to talk a little bit about what are those things that
we can be doing, just the tiny things.
And I'll give you a priority checklist at the end of what could I be
doing realistically with the amount of time that my team has.
So, here's what we're going to do.
First, I'm going to start really quickly with the why.
Let's define what the problem is. Let's define what some objectives are.
Then let's talk about the what. I'm going to walk through some cycles and
let's talk about what good can look like, and then I'm going to give you the what
now. Because I really want this to be conversational and not
just me talking for 50-ish minutes
and you guys are like, "I left with nothing.
This was just all fluff."
Okay.
But first,
I want a show of hands.
Do you have a month-end checklist and do you actually follow it?
And I'm going to be honest here. Honestly, I was probably
C for a couple of years, because I was going through an implementation
process when I was at the City of Rancho Cucamonga, and I don't think
I had time to live the month-end close, so we did abbreviated
things. So, pull of hands from the people in the audience, A, B, C.
Who's C? Just raise your hand if you're C.
Really? Nobody raising their hands? You guys are all As then. Heck yeah.
You guys don't even need me.
All right.
So let's just get started. I'm going to not linger too much, but let's
define what the year-end problem is.
So, if you think of it this way, the year-end problem is really 12 months of
deferred work that we then cram into 90 days from July through
September about, and it is sometimes very painful.
I'm going to be also honest. I love technology, but the fix is not always more
tech or more people, although most would be pretty nice to have.
The
problem is, is that most of the year, we're just staying at the cash basis, right?
And then all of a sudden, year-end comes and we've got to do the accruals, we've
got to do capital assets, we've got to do leases, we've got to do SPIDRs, we've got
to do whatever the GASB gives us
next year. Right? Probably the year after that when they throw out all those new
ones at us.
So then we're going to add in the staff scramble to get
all the information we need. We're talking about public works,
engineering. I don't know about you guys, but that was
hard getting all the infrastructure information from engineering every year.
Capital assets was tough. I got one of my
former senior accountants in the back.
He could attest to that because he was responsible for putting it all together.
It was rough.
And then, that puts us into the reactiveness.
So,
I guess we define what the problem is.
So let's see where the solutions can come from.
The core objective for every finance department, and if you don't agree
with me, I want to talk to you after,
is we want to minimize how many resources we are using
every single day throughout the year.
We want to minimize the number of transaction errors that we had that we had to
fix, because fixing things takes twice as long as preventing them in the
first place.
And we also want timely reporting. Put a little joke up there if you guys read it.
Forty-five days after the month-end close, that document, that's a historical
document at that point. You can't make any decisions on that.
That was way back when.
So, another thing I want to talk about here, because I got some pushback on this,
is, well,
I'm a small agency or I'm a large agency.
Well, the equation's pretty much the same.
You just have different problems, really.
If you're a large agency, yeah, you probably have more staff, more redundancies,
but you also have more funds, more programs, more compliance projects, more
capital projects. If you're a small agency, you probably have less redundancy,
but you should have less transactions overall.
So, I
can't really give you all the ways to solve all the problems of the world,
but I will try to help in some aspects.
So, what gets in the way? Really quickly.
First thing is bottlenecks. So when you think about what we're about to talk about
with the recurring processes, look for bottlenecks.
Where does work stop? Where does it stack up?
And what can you do to reallocate or redesign that process to make it go a little
smoother? What controls do you have?
And sorry auditor friends out there,
look at your controls and actually say, "Is it helping me or is it just adding
friction?" Cost-benefit, right? We have controls.
It's just always been that way because it's always been that way.
What is it actually providing me?
The distance and wait times. Another way to say this is if there's
paper documents that have to come from those off-site locations to me in
finance or get traveled around, are there ways that I can speed that up,
take paper to an electronic process?
Errors. Let's think about those recurring ones, the ones
that every single review step, we catch these problems.
Let's work on fixing those. Technology.
Again, feel bad I'm going to pick on technology here.
Technology is not always the solution.
Even a partially configured tool is better if it's
consistently used than this extravagant system that's
never touched, and you're just still doing the Excel work on the outside.
And last thing is reporting. This was big for me.
Probably got me in trouble a couple times, to be honest.
But I push back on reports. Who uses this thing?
It takes me a week to produce every single month.
You look at it for five minutes.Push back on those things
sometimes as they make sense. Read the room.
Lastly, simple--
What did I do?
Oh my gosh, scared me.
So here's the big crux of the whole thing.
Simplification is complex.
Think about all the new programs, new compliance things, that
great idea that that department had that somehow they don't seem
to understand how it all goes to finance and you guys have to make sure it's all
being put together correctly. Those things aggregate.
They get really complex. Just adds things to the plate, right?
There's another thing in here when we talk about making some of these changes to
make our lives easier for the year-end is change management.
Because sometimes those things that we have done, or the
people in our group have done, there's a dynamic and there's a role change that's
going to have to happen potentially. And people are going to push back on that.
That's okay. That's just normal change management.
Think of this like preventative
maintenance on infrastructure.
If you defer it, you save costs this year, but down the road, it
costs you 10 times more. That's what we're talking about with the complexity.
And the only other thing I'll say on here, I wrote a lot of notes on
here. I literally was in my backyard writing out these slides because I
love this stuff. And I wrote a lot of extra notes that I won't even go
over in the presentation because I want you guys just to have them in your packets.
The note about culture and the approach for all this, do not take the
tsunami wave of change. You will burn people out, and then at
the end, when you finally say, "Some of this stuff was not worth it," you
lost a little trust with the group, right?
So we're going to talk a little bit about taking some of these things slow but
intentional.
All right. I'm speeding through this. I'm doing good.
Polling question number two. What do you think your biggest barrier to
having a cleaner monthly close at your agency?
And I put monthly, I put quarterly, biannual. What do you think it is for you guys?
Is it the timing and staffing capacity?
Do you have ERP limitations? Do you have process design or a lack of
documentation issue? Do you have trouble coordinating with other
departments? Or it's all of it. For me, it was D.
Because we were an agency that was very decentralized, and there was a lot
of pieces of information that we had to go out and gather.
But that was always the biggest hurdle because I had to explain why me getting this
thing was so important.
All right.
Quickly, what are the essential patterns?
Foundational stuff is the monthly stuff here.
So we're going to talk about bank recs, the small AR/AP reviews that keep
you steady throughout the year.
The payroll liability reconciliation, it's a big one I see a lot of when we
get called in to come and fix things.
Quarterly, we talk a little bit about capital assets, especially the
vehicles and equipment stuff you buy, the disposals.
There's also some
kind of relational work with budget we could talk about.
And then the annual is, of course, the capital asset
completion for the roll forward. Those things you really can't do during the year.
Oh, I almost forgot my pro tips.
Your
quarters and your monthlies don't always have to align with a normal
calendar quarter. Think about your agency and the capacity you have.
Right now, you're slammed with budget.
You don't want to be touching any of this stuff.
But as you get closer into May, you could probably start picking some things up.
Leases, speed is long-term debt, some pension stuff.
You can start working on it now.
All right. Transactionals. So with this, bear
with me, you're going to see I got a lot of information on these slides.
I'm going to summarize it down. I'm going to talk a little bit about my stories
and just some things to share. Promise, no names will be said
at all. Cash receipts. Here's the core problem that I see
is there is a lack of discipline when it comes to cash
receipt posting
that turns into the bank rec.
When I say this, so what I'm talking about is there is no daily
cash process at play. And so all of a sudden, it's a month-end and you're
trying to put together the bank reconciliation, and you're like, "Oh my gosh,
this does not tie and I cannot figure out what's happened.
It's happened somewhere around here. I don't know. It's good enough.
Let me move on."
Somehow, the bank reconciliation, which is a great monthly process for not only
fraud controls, but your completeness of your accounting, turns into a year-end
activity. And then they call us, and I got one of my great people
back there. We come in and we go, "Okay,
let's do 12 months of bank rec," because it never has reconciled.
But the biggest issues that I see with this is
not only the kind of discipline to get the monthly bank rec done and get it
fully reconciled to zero, but there's also a lag
time with the cash receipt postings.
So we think about at most finance operations, you have a
front counter where you're collecting your various payments.
You have off-site locations, too.
And sometimes those people are a little bit naughty.
They don't always post things and get things put into the deposit bags and
sent over. Your bank reconciliation is what's supposed to
catch all that. So when you're looking at your daily cash and you're like,
"Wait, why does Animal Center have $100,000 getting put through the GL,
but I don't see anything going through the bank?
Oh, they must be holding onto the cash." That creates a discrepancy,
especially when you catch it after the month-end. Now you have this big DIT.
It's just a mess, right? So we want to fix that.
If I can say there's one thing, if you are not doing, you want to go
back and put into place is a daily cash process.
It's going to make your lives so much easier.
It's going to make your accounting much more reliable, and it's
just going to make everything easier because they're all things
lead through the cash process, right?The other
things we see is investments and fiscal agents, those also
not getting reconciled as often.
I hesitate to say do it monthly because I know that for some
organizations out there, when you have bond and your fiscal agent accounts, it's
probably okay to do those quarterly.
You want to keep track of them, make sure there's nothing weird happening, but for
the most part, you're just earning interest and then you're paying your debt
service twice a year. You could probably move those to quarterly and save some
time. But for the general cash and those operations, you want to
do this daily so you can have a good month-end close process, at
least for your cash reconciliation.
Receivables.
So
here's the big issue here.
If you're like me,
probably most governments, you have decentralized receipting.
You have your departments that are out there, they're doing their own thing, and
then at the end of the year, you're kind of scrambling and saying, "Where are all
my grant reimbursements? Where are X, Y, and Z?" And
then you're having to hunt and gather.
It was an issue with me too. We see this quite
often when we're coming in to help and it's like, "Okay, well, give me all your
grant coordinators." "We don't even know who they are."
Well, that's a problem. So one of the things when I talked about the
bottleneck approach, like the distance and wait times,
a quick thing might be just to set up a centralized folder and like, "Hey,
as you do your grant reimbursements, can you just shove them in here and we'll
gather them later?" You don't even have to always
keep track of those. But a good way to keep track of them is when you start getting
cash receipts in, you're like, "Where does this go?
What's the account number?" Then you start talking to the department, "Hey, I
really need to get this grant reimbursement in my system and I can help
you track it. Here's a benefit to you, department.
I can tell you if you've gotten it yet or not."
The other crazy one is when they do their grant reimbursements in the end of the
year for cash flow reasons, and then it crosses multiple fiscal
periods. And that just becomes a little bit of a headache from an accounting
standpoint. You can also set really good cutoff times with monthly,
quarterly, biannual. Just look at your cash flow needs and what makes sense there.
Also on receivables, think about those off-site systems again.
What are those ones that you just never touch?
And maybe run a
source of truth, your sub-ledger for those, and compare it to the actual GL.
I will say, though, if you have a receivable account that just captures
everything,
you might want to do a little bit of chart of account work first.
You might want to look at your receivables and say, "I have one
receivable that captures everything? No.
I want a receivable that captures receivables for this system,
this system, this system, or this department." It'll make your life
a lot easier, and you'll be able to quickly find out what's off by the
end of the year.
All right.
Accounts payable.
There's probably not a whole lot during the year that you maybe need to do with
accounts payable. Most of us will process accounts payable,
cut checks pretty much the same time.
So AP is zero until the end of the year, where it really starts accumulating.
What I will say, though, if you have system problems here, it might be
something like mine, where when we post reclassifications, the
system did a little dumb thing and it made a positive or negative on the AP.
Those had to be manually figured out.
This is one of those processes that if all is well and good and you're not posting
manual entries that have to be manually fixed, it's just a quick
debit and credit. If it's cross-funds, move the cash to.
Not that bad.
The problem that I saw the most is P cards and
retainages. P cards somehow kind
of
linger around with the other departments.
We're not getting stuff on time from them and then when we do get it, it's a rush
to get it put in, reconciled, and clear either
that holding liability account because you've already paid the statement,
and you're not really doing a good job checking personal
expenses. You guys ever have to deal with that?
Somehow they forgot their P card was attached to their Amazon account or their
Uber account, and then you're having to chase down money.
You don't want to be doing that at the end of the year, right?
And retainages is a good one where on a monthly or quarterly basis,
you could be looking at the retainages and saying, "Does this make sense?" And
better yet, work with your AP staff to when they get that
retainage payment, check against that report to make sure, "Yep,
everything's matching up. I can clear it." And that becomes your
year-end
work paper. It just turns into it magically almost.
But you've done work throughout the year to make it that.
You don't have to put it together at the end of the year and then find out
you paid
Hardy and Hardy $100 more than it should have been because there was a calculation
error.
Payroll.
So besides the bank reconciliation, this is probably the
most complicated reconciliation you can do, but somehow it
is the one that sometimes gets neglected.
And unfortunately, this is also the one that impacts your organization and impacts
employees directly. Because when you're paying for benefits that you are
not getting a deduction for, or you have employees paying the wrong
amounts, when you find that problem, it's kind of painful to fix.
You finding payroll reconciliation liability problems at the end of the year, I
guarantee it is never a quick fix.
So when you're doing this, it's an easy process.
Sorry, I said easy. I should not say easy.
It is a simple process of comparing
what's actually getting run to the payroll register and treat any difference,
even if it's a penny, as if it is a problem that you need to backtrack and find
out what is happening. Sometimes it's a system problem, and we've seen
those where it's actually getting posted to the wrong account.
Sometimes it's an AP problem where when that life
insurance invoice comes up, they're coding it to the wrong thing.So when
you go and pay things, a good training source for your staff is to
say, "These two things need to tie without
exception from what I've withheld and what I have to remit." They have to
tie. If they don't tie, raise your hand, let's figure this out.
Figure it out now, you don't have to figure it out at year-end.
Capital assets. I know some of you guys are probably shaking your head like, "You
can't do capital assets during the year." Yes, you can. Yes, you can.
You absolutely can. You can do pieces of it. Sometimes it's just gathering stuff.
Oh my gosh, I see finger pointing in the back.
Here's what you can do. Even if it's not the accounting part of it, you can start
gathering information. Does anyone, as a part of their month-end closes, read
minutes? I used to read minutes all the time.
We used to look for things like notices of completions, the developer deposits of
infrastructure, deposits to developer donations of infrastructure.
Capture those things now, because this was our biggest
headache at year-end, getting all that information, because it's like, we finished
that project nine months ago. I don't have the documents to show you
what's happening anymore. And I think there's a new infrastructure
GASB that they're talking about where you actually have to start breaking out
what's infrastructure, what's building, what's whatever, if you have different
depreciation lives.
Start doing this now. Even if you don't do the actual accounting
for it, gather it, put it in your audit folder, have it ready,
and you can pick it up then. But having to chase it around and be
reactive at the end of the year, that's a nightmare.
The other thing you can be doing is you buy that vehicle, you buy that
equipment, you should be receiving it then.
It's simple enough to do if you have your system set up correctly.
And if you don't have your system set up correctly, this was one of those ERP
limitations where you may want to look at that.
Because when I buy that vehicle, when that purchase order gets created, it usually
asks you, "Is this an asset?" If it is, it should
automatically turn it into an asset, where then at the end of the year, you can
just account for everything, look at your capital outlay expenditures, everything
looks good, I've accounted for everything.
Capital assets is pretty much a
roll-forward compilation at that point.
Donated
infrastructure. Sorry, not donated. I can't read.
Disposals. There's two D words up there. I got confused.
Disposals. Make friends with purchasing and public works.
They're probably the people that know when assets are either being sold at auction
or being taken out of someone's office.
Like, we're getting rid of all the furniture and fixtures here, they're selling the
vehicles, they're selling the equipment.
If you can link up with them, just from a communication
standpoint, when you get that asset disposal
form, I want a copy of it. Because then I can look at my records and make sure that
gets disposed of.
Short of you looking at every auction
invoice at the end of the year and figuring out what they sold, and those
descriptions are not always fun to match up with your fixed asset records.
All right. Budget analysis, analytics, intermediary steps.
Believe it or not, I was actually talking to somebody in the back over here,
your mid-year budget, your budget development cycle, you're
analyzing a lot of revenues and expenditures and figuring out what is
happening.
You heard Riley in the beginning talk about the MD&A, and you could start prepping
for it. This is how. This is how you can start prepping for it.
You can start capturing those variances, saving those variance reports,
saving your analysis in your audit folder, so when you get to the year-end, you
kind of already know what's happening, right?
But you can also use that information to refer to for the MD&A.
You do not have to go back and uncover the
mystery all over again.
Right? Magical.
No. It's just the discipline work that you can take throughout the
year. I wrote down intermediary steps.
This is what worked for me. It may not work for you, but this is what worked for
me. I used my Q1 and my Q2 to help me make my
mid-year. If you're still closing September, November,
well, January is an estimate for the mid-year at that point, because I
know some things aren't fully lined up and maybe not accurate, because I
haven't really been looking at them.
Then for Q3,
Q3 doesn't have to happen in March. I'm too busy in March.
I'm putting together the budget. Q3 could happen in April, May,
and at that point, what's available to us?
Well, I probably made all my debt service payments.
Hey, accountant, let's put together the long-term debt roll forward
now. We've made all the payments. You can calculate what accrued interest is at the
end of the year based on the debt service schedules.
You could probably start leases in SPIDAs.
We do this for a lot of our clients. We do them in tranches.
We're going to read all the minutes through April.
We're going to pick out all the new leases and subscriptions.
We're going to ask about any amendments, any things that have terminated at the end
of the following year. Start that now, because then you can come back,
pick up the last three, two months, and then do your journal entries in
July and August, and you don't have to go unpack the full 12 months all over again.
Right? Just some simple steps like that help prepare you for year-end when it
starts getting crazy because you're doing the close and you're also
doing your daily processes still.
So yeah, and I am picking on technology.
I've heard it too many times. "Well, we'll just get a new system"
or "This piece of technology, that's going to fix all my problems." No,
it won't. Because the underlying thing is the people and the
processes. If you go and buy new technology, you just basically have a
fancier vehicle to be exactly where you are. Right?
The technology is not going to change it.
Now, if you're at the point where the technology cannot take you
farther, you've actually also made yourself a really strong argument for
council and the city manager of like, "I need new technology.
I literally have taken this thing to the limits with the people that I have.
We are using the system. Here are all my problems."
What a great sell, right?The other thing to think
about is what are all those Excel files that I'm probably using outside of the
system, and can my system do it?
Because it's a lot easier to have all your information for the year in
your one source of truth, which is your financial system, than it is in
every single one of these spreadsheets that can get corrupted, can get lost,
can get outdated. You want it in your system.
Polling question number three.
Which of these do you reconcile consistently?
I put monthly, but consistently.
Some? None? Anybody raise their hands? Anything?
No?
Some things?
Ryan's reconciling some things. Good job, Ryan.
All right.
Let's put this all together. I will stop talking.
You can ask me questions, or you can go home.
I like graphics.
This hopefully represents everything I'm talking about.
The little bitty steps that we take every single month accumulate to the
year-end goal.
Because when we don't have those little bitty steps, it's a big
jump for year-end.
If you
guys are picture takers with the slides, this is what picture you want to take.
All right.
So what am I going to do Monday morning?
Hopefully, some of you guys have been asking that. Like, yeah, it's May.
Year-end's right around the corner again.
I really want to have a better year-end for me, for my staff.
I don't like working all those late nights.
Some of them are okay, but I don't like working all of them.
What I would recommend, I talked a little about the tsunami of change.
You don't want to do that. Pick one thing that you are not doing
currently and do it for a month. Then do it for
two months, then do it for three months.
Evaluate it. Do the postmortem on it.
Did this make our lives better? Will it make our lives better, or was this a
complete waste of time?
Because the other thing is that we all know that if
I, and I say the royal I, if I, the finance director,
wanted this done, I could do it all, but I would have no time for
anything else. This is a team-led approach.
So you also want to talk with your team on what are those things that
we could be doing reasonably to make it a little bit better at the
end of the year. Those field-level people will know what they're
talking about.
It's your job to listen and to kind of figure out how we accomplish this.
Another thing is pull your trial balance.
Something we see a lot of is these suspense and clearing accounts, especially when
it came to the bank reconciliation.
We did this too, right? Like, "Well, I don't know where this deposit goes, but I
need to get the cash out of my vault into the bank.
Let's post it here." But then it sits there, and then we never go back and look at
it. And at the end of the year, it's like, "I got to pull all this out again
and figure out what the heck this is." That's a problem. Do that now.
I already talked about kind of the ERP stuff, but also ask your staff
about what is it that they're doing outside the system. Evaluate your ERP.
That's a longer-term solution, but that might be something you start by at least
asking about.
Have a conversation about payroll liabilities.
Again, this was the one that, besides the bank, it gets really messy really
quick. And again, it impacts your organization and your employees when it's kind of
neglect. Oh, lastly, how can I forget?
Talk to your other departments
because you do have to get information from them,
and so it's kind of that reach across the aisle, olive branch,
bridge situation of like, "I need this stuff, and if you can give it to me now,
I'll hold onto it, and then you won't hear too much of me from
July and September on, I promise."
Polling question four. What are you going to do Monday?
Are you going to
do the monthly reconciliation, maybe try it out, see how it feels?
You going to pull the trial balance?
You're going to ask your team what they could be doing inside the
ERP?
You going to talk to the other departments?
Like, if this was me four years ago, it'd be E all the
way. That was my biggest hang-up. Those kind of
distance and wait times that I had with them, that's what I would handle.
All right. Some anecdotal guidance
because I don't know your organization. Every single organization's very different.
If I was in your shoes, the first thing I would do
is the bank reconciliation. Again, it's important for fraud
control, but it's really a completeness.
If you can make sure your bank and your cash is reconciled, you're pretty
sure that all the transactions have been posted.
Next thing is the payroll liability.
If I said it once, I've said it 1,000 times now.
Those impact a lot of people other than just the numbers.
If there's a problem there, you want to be working to understand what the impacts
have been. You want to go down and talk to HR and say, "Hey, we've been
under-collecting from these people," or, "We've been over-collecting,"
or, "We have a bunch of employees that are still on the healthcare
insurance plan that have since terminated."
Not that that happened.
You want to be looking at your AR and AP, of course, right?
The AP can be a really quick one, just making sure that looks
good. Your AR subledgers, I'm really talking about if you have decentralized,
you want to really start talking to those departments and figure out what cutoff
times, how can I get information from you?
How can I make this easy for both of us and those other source
and systems? Because eventually you're going to make sure that that
source of truth ties to your GL.
Secondary priority, capital assets,
because that is the biggest task you will likely do at
year-end. So if you can start now on anything, that is fantastic.
And the budget variance analysis,
it's all the same source of data, and if you can make sure that your
accounting's accurate, your budget and your variance analysis is going to be
accurate as well.And then the longer term is evaluate your
ERP. Don't go out and buy that shiny new software that can claim it can do
everything. Utilize the one you can, figure out where the gaps are, and what you
really need for your organization.
And remember, you can't fix this all right away. This takes time.
It takes a team. Because again, if it was just up to me and I had all the hours in
the world, I could do it all myself, but you can't do that. Nobody can.
All right.
I did good on time, and I'm here for questions.
Let's go.
They're not even ready for me.
Any questions?
Gotta have some questions.
Spilled my heart out.
Any questions for Noah?
I'm going to take that as either y'all want to go, or I was that good.
He was just that good. I'm going to go to the lab.
I think-
Are there any online questions?
Anything online? Okay.
Thank you.
Okay. Thank you, Noah. Well, we finished up.
That's all the presentations we have for today.
Hope it was beneficial and useful for you all.
But before we close out, we have our final two
raffles.
Raffle prizes. So,
again, this is not the person who won the raffle.
I probably should have clarified that previously.
This is who's going to get to pull the name for the winner.
So Carlo from Santa Monica, are you here?
All right. There you are.
Are we handing it out already?
He's right here.
Oh, this sounds like collusion.
Jorge?
Santa Monica rewarding Santa Monica. I love it.
Okay, and our final person who gets to pull
a name out of the bag of names,
Marlon, City of Lompoc.
City of Lompoc, Marlon.
You can read it if you want.
From the City of Downey, we got
Sandra Luna. Winner.
Congratulations.
All right. Well, that concludes everything.
Again, thank you all so much for coming out.
It's a pleasure getting together in person and going over all the fun stuff that's
happening in public accounting right now.
Again, just by way of reminder, if you have not filled out the course
evaluation, please do. We would love to have your feedback. But that is it.
Thank you, and have safe trips home or wherever you're heading to.
Does the safety, you said it was safety.
If that pepper-